**Babylon** was an ancient city in the
[fertile crescent](index.php?title=Fertile_crescent&action=edit&redlink=1 "Fertile crescent (page does not exist)")
that takes its name from the Hebrew verb "to confuse." Ruins along
the
[Euphrates River](index.php?title=Euphrates_River&action=edit&redlink=1 "Euphrates River (page does not exist)")
about 60 miles south of modern Baghdad mark the location of the
city that played a significant role in the history of the nation of
Israel as the destination of the Jewish captives taken by
[Nebuchadnezzar](index.php?title=Nebuchadnezzar&action=edit&redlink=1 "Nebuchadnezzar (page does not exist)").
It was the capitol of the Babylonian empire in the
[Old Testament](Old_Testament "Old Testament"), and is referred to
in the [New Testament](New_Testament "New Testament") with both a
literal and a figurative meaning.

Even though the vast majority of the more than 250 scriptural
references to Babylon clearly indicate a literal geographic
location, it is also used as a symbol of harlotry and general evil.
Some commentators suggest Peter uses it as a code word that stands
for some other physical city, most likely Rome (1 Pet. 5:13), while
John appears to use it in Revelation as a symbolic reference to
some political or religious system of future (e.g. Rev. 14:8).

## Contents

-   [1 In History](#In_History)
-   [2 In the Old Testament](#In_the_Old_Testament)
-   [3 In the Revelation](#In_the_Revelation)
    -   [3.1 Symbolic Interpretations](#Symbolic_Interpretations)
        -   [3.1.1 Idealist View](#Idealist_View)
        -   [3.1.2 Preterist View](#Preterist_View)
        -   [3.1.3 Historicist View](#Historicist_View)

    -   [3.2 Literal Interpretation](#Literal_Interpretation)
        -   [3.2.1 Futurist View](#Futurist_View)



## In History

*This is a **[section stub](http://www.theopedia.com/Category:Theopedia_sectionstubs "Category:Theopedia sectionstubs")**. Please edit it to add information.*
## In the Old Testament

*This is a **[section stub](http://www.theopedia.com/Category:Theopedia_sectionstubs "Category:Theopedia sectionstubs")**. Please edit it to add information.*
## In the Revelation

Babylon is first alluded to in Revelation 14:8, when an angel
pronounces judgment saying, "Fallen, fallen is Babylon the great,
she who made all nations drink the wine of the passion of her
sexual immorality" (ESV). The interpretation of these passages
rests heavily on the hermeneutical method employed.

### Symbolic Interpretations

#### Idealist View

If one approaches the text as mere allegory (such as the idealist),
then it would follow that the imagery of the harlot could refer to
any world system or ideology from which we are to flee. Thus,
idealists hear the command to leave Babylon in Revelation 18:4
echoed in Paul's admonition to "flee immorality" (I Corinthians
6:18) as much as in the prophets' warnings to "Escape, you who are
living with the daughter of Babylon," (Zechariah 2:7) and to "Go
forth from Babylon! Flee from the Chaldeans!" (Isaiah 48:20).

The recurring harlotry imagery may lead some to speculate that
"she" is some false religious system on account of passages that
link infidelity to rebellion. However, John makes it obvious that
his imagery specifically refers to a city when he says, "The woman
whom you saw is the great city, which reigns over the kings of the
earth." (Revelation 17:18) This use of personification is
consistent with the portrayal of the rebellion of Tyre (Isaiah
23:16-17) and Nineveh (Nahum 3:4).

Clearly, a mere allegorical view of Babylon falls short of the
demands of a consistently literal, normal, grammatical, historical,
contextual interpretation of Scripture.

#### Preterist View

Another approach to understanding the harlot named Babylon is to
view her as symbolically referring to another city. Preterist
proponents of this view would identify her as Jerusalem, pointing
to the destruction of the city in the first century as the basis
for John's "narrative". However, John seems to stress the prophetic
nature of his writing rather than the apocalyptic. Furthermore, the
vivid description he gives of the fall of Babylon matches that of
the prophetic accounts of Isaiah 13-14 and Jeremiah 50-51 much more
closely than the historic records of Jerusalem's fall.

The prophet Isaiah equates the destruction of Babylon with the day
of the Lord (Isaiah 13:6-9), linking it with cosmic disturbances
(Isaiah 13:10-13) and universal judgment (Isaiah 13:11-12),
indicating Israel's restoration would immediately follow (Isaiah
14:1-4) along with worldwide rest and peace (Isaiah 14:5-8). All of
these prophetic elements are contained within John's Revelation.

Jeremiah's account also has a number of striking parallels to
Revelation 17-18. Both passages describe Babylon as holding a
golden cup (Jeremiah 51:7), dwelling on many waters (Jeremiah
51:13), and coming to sudden (Jeremiah 51:8), deserved (Jeremiah
51:63-64), and final (Jeremiah 50:39) destruction by fire (Jeremiah
51:30), with God's people fleeing (Jeremiah 51:6, 45) and heaven
rejoicing (Jeremiah 51:48).

It would be difficult to argue that these details line up with the
historical facts of the defeat of Babylon in 539 BC or the
destruction of Jerusalem in AD 70, thus make this particular
symbolic view untenable. Rather, it seems more likely that all
three passages demand a future fulfillment of prophecies including
the rise and fall of a literal city of Babylon during the last
days.

#### Historicist View

Some Historicist adherents of a symbolic view would hold up either
the political city of Rome or the ecclesiastical papacy of Rome and
look to either the decline of the Roman Empire or the fall of Roman
Catholicism as the fulfillment of the prophecy. Here again, the
details provided do not align with the reality of historical
record.

While one can find some similarities in both, there exists a
confounding lack of evidence to validate this interpretation of
Scripture. In addition, there is also the daunting question as to
why John would have chosen to codify his comments about Rome. The
notion that his reference to the "seven mountains" (17:9)
supposedly concealed the fact that he was speaking of Rome has
little support and forces the reader into an inconsistent
hermeneutic.

A more likely explanation is that her sitting on the beast with
seven heads -- interpreted by John as both mountains and kings
(17:9-10) -- probably refers to control rather than location, much
like the reference to her sitting on "many waters" (17:1) (which
does not, incidentally, characterize Rome) is interpreted later in
the passage as having control over "peoples and multitudes and
nations and tongues" (17:15).

Further, most interpreters agree that the other geographic places
and cities mentioned in Revelation refer to literal locations, such
as Patmos (1:9), the Euphrates (9:14; 16:12), Armageddon (16:16),
and Jerusalem (21:2,10). When John wishes to express that he is
using the name of a city symbolically, he makes it explicit, such
as "the great city which mystically (lit. spiritually) is called
Sodom and Egypt, where also their Lord was crucified." 11:8
Clearly, a symbolic or coded identity of Babylon is outside the
standard of a consistently literal, normal, grammatical,
historical, contextual interpretation of Scripture.

### Literal Interpretation

#### Futurist View

Alternatively, a Futurist approach to interpreting the harlot of
Revelation yields a view that is in complete harmony with the
Golden Rule of Interpretation, which states, "When the plain sense
of scripture makes common sense, seek no other sense." While John
does use symbolic language in his description of the character and
events of the harlot named Babylon, he does not employ any formula
which leads the reader to understand anything other than a literal
physical city which will sway many with her immorality (Revelation
17:2), exert extensive political and economic control on the earth
(Revelation 17:4, 9-10, 15), and bring about a great persecution to
followers of Jesus (Revelation 17:6). The account that follows
details in plain language Babylon's ultimate demise and the
reaction of those who witness it.

Critics of this perspective may point to the fact that Babylon has
already been destroyed as evidence that the harlot of John's
prophecy could not refer to the same city. However, similarities
between Zechariah's vision of the ephah (Zechariah 5:5-11) and
John's vision of the harlot give the interpreter confidence in the
literal future rise and fall of Babylon. Even though he began to
prophesy after the initial fall of the Babylonian empire (Zechariah
1:1), Zechariah sees a woman named "Wickedness" taken to Shinar,
i.e. Babylon (Daniel 1:2), indicating that evil will reign once
more in that region of the world. Employing the hermeneutic method
of a consistently literal, normal, grammatical, historical,
contextual interpretation of Scripture will lead the reader to an
understanding that the harlot named Babylon described in Revelation
17-18 represents a future, physical, rebuilt city where the
prophecies of Isaiah, Jeremiah, Zechariah and the apostle John will
be fulfilled during the last days.



