blocks:
- Holy_Spirit
---
## Pentecostal view

Pentecostal theology teaches the Baptism in the Holy Spirit (or
Baptism with the Holy Spirit) is a definite experience, not
identical with conversion (Acts 19:2). That is to say, it is both
distinct from and subsequent to salvation (though it may occur
immediately -Acts 10:44). While all believers are indwelt by the
Holy Spirit, the Baptism with the Holy Spirit refers to the first
time the believer is filled with the Holy Spirit (i.e.Acts 2:4).
This does not mean however that that believer will be permanently
filled with the Holy Spirit, but he is to seek to be filled when he
is not (Eph. 5:18).

### Glass of Water

Pentecostals often use the analogy of a glass with
water.^[***[citation\ needed](http://www.theopedia.com/Theopedia:Writing_guide#Reference_your_work\ "Theopedia:Writing\ guide")***]^
The believer is the glass, and the water is the Holy Spirit. All
believers have the Holy Spirit, the glass always has some water (as
long as they are believers). Some believers have more water than
others (have more of the power/influence of the H.S.) but are not
completely filled with water. The believer who is filled with the
H.S. is the glass that is completely filled with water (he is
completely under the influence of the H.S., i.e. Acts 7:55, 13:9),
and the first time this happens is called the Baptism of the Holy
Spirit.

### Physical Evidence

Pentecostals have traditionally believed that the Baptism in the
Holy Spirit is physically evidenced by the supernatural gift of
speaking in other tongues (glossolalia). That is, a person who is
baptized with the H.S. will speak in tongues. A person may
experience a good measure of the H.S., and yet not have been
baptized in the H.S. Now, the better pentecostal theologians
distance themselves from this viewpoint.

Pentecostal’s (and other’s) point to the close association of
Biblical references to "Baptism with the Holy Spirit" and with
“speaking in tongues". In the book of Acts, there are three
specific references to individuals speaking in tongues: Acts 1:4,
Acts 10:46 and Acts 19:6. Each of these instances of
tongues-speaking is immediately subsequent to or contemporary with
an experience of being "baptized with the Holy Spirit". The
experience in Acts 1:1-4, which included tongues-speaking (see Acts
1:4), may be connected with the prediction by Jesus in Acts 1:5
that the disciples would be "baptized with the Holy Spirit not many
days from now." This experience was referred to later in retrospect
by Peter as well, as being "baptized with the Holy Spirit" (Acts
11:16). The description of Cornelius' household receiving the
gospel from Peter and his companions in Acts 10:46, which included
a reference to their "speaking in tongues", is later associated by
Peter with the Pentecost experience of the disciples, relating that
Cornelius and his friends and family were "baptized with the Holy
Spirit" as the disciples had been at Pentecost (Acts 11:16). Acts
19:6, which includes reference to individuals in Ephesus "speaking
in tongues", although not specifically using the term "baptized
with the Holy Spirit", states that the "Holy Spirit came upon
them".

### 1 Corinthians 12:13

1 Cor. 12:13 is the verse
[Cessationists](Cessationism "Cessationism") use to show that the
Baptism of the Holy Spirit occurs at conversion, regardless of
experience. That is, all believers receive the baptism of the Holy
Spirit when they believe since they were "baptized" "by one Spirit"
into the body of Christ, whether they experience anything or not.

Regarding this, John Piper (who is not a pentecostal but a reformed
noncessationist) says...

Now the positive thing I want to say about the moderate Pentecostal
teaching (represented by the Bennets) is that it is right to stress
the experiential reality of receiving the Spirit. When you read the
New Testament honestly, you can't help but get the impression of a
big difference from a lot of contemporary Christian experience. For
them the Holy Spirit was a fact of experience...
I think that being baptized with the Holy Spirit (the way Luke
means it) is not the same as being born again or being united to
Christ by the work of the Holy Spirit. In other words I don't think
that what Paul is talking about in 1 Corinthians 12:13 is the same
as what is happening here in Acts.
Paul says, "For by one Spirit we were all baptized into one
body—Jews or Greeks, slaves or free." The context shows that he is
referring to a work of the sovereign Spirit who unites all
believers to Christ.
In another sermon he says,

Receiving the Spirit Is a Life-Changing Experience : This is why
Paul can say in Acts 19:2 when he meets the confused disciples of
John the Baptist, "Did you receive the Holy Spirit when you
believed?" What would a contemporary Protestant evangelical say in
response to that question? I think we would say something like, "I
thought we automatically received the Holy Spirit when we believed.
I don't understand how you can even ask the question." How could
Paul ask that question? He could ask it, I think, because receiving
the Holy Spirit is a real experience. There are marks of it in your
life. And the best way to test the faith of these so-called
disciples is to ask them about their experience of the Spirit.

## External links

-   [Baptism in the Holy Spirit](http://ag.org/top/Beliefs/gendoct_02_baptismhs.cfm),
    [Assemblies of God](Assemblies_of_God "Assemblies of God") position
-   [You will be baptized with the Holy Spirit](http://www.desiringgod.org/ResourceLibrary/Sermons/ByDate/1990/726_You_Will_Be_Baptized_with_the_Holy_Spirit/),
    [How to receive the gift of the Holy Spirit](http://www.desiringgod.org/ResourceLibrary/Sermons/ByDate/1984/437_How_to_Receive_the_Gift_of_the_Holy_Spirit/),
    by [John Piper](John_Piper "John Piper")

-   [What Is The Baptism Of The Holy Spirit?](http://www.blueletterbible.org/faq/nbi/442.html),
    by Don Stewart
-   [The Baptism in the Holy Spirit](http://www.babylonfalls.org/forchristians/baptism_hs22july06.html),
    by Hermano Cisco