The **Baptism of Jesus** simultaneously marks the inauguration of
[Jesus](Jesus_Christ "Jesus Christ")' earthly ministry as well as
marking the beginning of the decline of John the Baptist's
ministry. [MacArthur](John_MacArthur "John MacArthur") is among
many who consider the baptism of Jesus to be little more than an
example for us to follow.^[[1]](#note-ftn1)^ Yet it is in fact so
much more. It is at the baptism that those who are most prone to
responding to their Messiah are gathered in repentance.

Many in Israel wondered if John might be the Messiah. Yet the last
prophet declares with assurance that he is not even worthy to untie
the laces of the Messiah's sandals (Matthew 3:11). John, the
official herald of the coming king was waiting for the Christ to be
revealed. The baptism of Jesus fulfills that need as the Messiah is
identified to John by a special [Theophany](Theophany "Theophany")
of the [Holy Spirit](Holy_Spirit "Holy Spirit"). It is this
identification which enables the
[Baptist](John_the_Baptist "John the Baptist") to complete his task
as herald (John 1:29-34). But the herald must wait his turn to
announce the king's arrival; the first public announcement is made
by [God the Father](God_the_Father "God the Father") himself.

Here at his baptism the death, burial and resurrection of Jesus is
first prefigured. It is here at his baptism that the perfect one
intentionally identifies himself with repentant sinners, and
demonstrates his full humility. It is at his baptism where the
redemptive ministry of Jesus Christ begins.

Each gospel contains an analogous passage which serves to clarify
certain aspects of the Matthew narrative. Mark 1:9-11 identifies
the geographic origin of Jesus more accurately as Nazareth. Luke
3:21-22 informs us that Jesus was praying as the heavens were
opened, and further clarifies that the Holy Spirit which descended
on Jesus was in the bodily form of a dove rather than simply flying
down the way a dove would. Both Mark and Luke have the heavenly
voice speaking directly to Jesus as in, "you are my beloved son..."
which raises significant questions concerning Matthew's purpose in
changing it. John's addition to the baptismal story (John 1:31-34)
is more contextual in nature. It is from John 1:32 that we discover
the baptizer did not know for certain that Jesus was the Messiah
until after he saw the dove come upon him. Therefore there was
something else about the nature and character of Jesus which caused
John to seek baptism from his cousin. These collective hints,
together with Matthew's account combine to display and explain the
baptism of Jesus Christ.

*Note: The bulk of the content for this article was extracted from [The Baptism of Jesus](http://www.stilltruth.com/webfm_send/1161) (PDF) by Thomas Black, with the author's permission.*


## Contents

-   [1 Biblical accounts](#Biblical_accounts)
-   [2 Textual Analysis](#Textual_Analysis)
    -   [2.1 Translation](#Translation)
    -   [2.2 Context](#Context)
    -   [2.3 Textual Variation](#Textual_Variation)

-   [3 Syntax and Exegesis](#Syntax_and_Exegesis)
    -   [3.1 Matthew 3:13](#Matthew_3:13)
    -   [3.2 Matthew 3:14](#Matthew_3:14)
    -   [3.3 Matthew 3:15](#Matthew_3:15)
    -   [3.4 Matthew 3:16](#Matthew_3:16)
    -   [3.5 Matthew 3:17](#Matthew_3:17)

-   [4 Explanation](#Explanation)
-   [5 Application](#Application)
-   [6 Conclusion](#Conclusion)
-   [7 Footnotes](#Footnotes)
-   [8 External links](#External_links)

## Biblical accounts

And this was his
[John the Baptist](John_the_Baptist "John the Baptist") message:
After me will come one more powerful than I, the thongs of whose
sandals I am not worthy to stoop down and untie. I baptize you with
water, but he will baptize you with the
[Holy Spirit](Holy_Spirit "Holy Spirit"). At that time Jesus came
from Nazareth in Galilee and was baptized by John in the Jordan. As
[Jesus](Jesus "Jesus") was coming up out of the water, he saw
[heaven](Heaven "Heaven") being torn open and the Spirit descending
on him like a dove. And a voice came from heaven: You are my Son,
whom I love; with you I am well pleased. At once the Spirit sent
him out into the desert, and he was in the desert forty days, being
tempted by [Satan](Satan "Satan"). He was with the wild animals,
and angels attended him. - Mark 1:7-13, [NIV](NIV "NIV")

Then Jesus came from Galilee to the Jordan to be baptized by John.
But John tried to deter him, saying, "I need to be baptized by you,
and do you come to me?" Jesus replied, "Let it be so now; it is
proper for us to do this to fulfill all righteousness." Then John
consented. As soon as Jesus was baptized, he went up out of the
water. At that moment heaven was opened, and he saw the Spirit of
God descending like a dove and lighting on him. And a voice from
heaven said, "This is my Son, whom I love; with him I am well
pleased." - Matt. 3:13-17, [NIV](NIV "NIV")

## Textual Analysis

### Translation

^3:13^Then [Jesus](Jesus "Jesus") came from
[Galilee](index.php?title=Galilee&action=edit&redlink=1 "Galilee (page does not exist)")
to John at the
[Jordan River](index.php?title=Jordan_River&action=edit&redlink=1 "Jordan River (page does not exist)")
in order to be baptized by him. ^3:14^But John attempted to prevent
him by saying, "I am the one who has a need to be baptized by you
and yet you come to me?" ^3:15^ But answering, Jesus said to him,
"right now you *must* permit it, for it is proper for us to fulfill
all righteousness in this way." Then he permitted him. ^3:16^ Now,
when Jesus had been baptized, he immediately came out of the water.
And behold! The heavens were opened for him and he saw the Spirit
of God as a dove, coming down and landing on him. ^3:17^ And
behold! There was a voice out of the heavens saying "this is my
beloved son in whom I am well pleased." - Matthew 3:13-17

### Context

The baptism of Jesus is the first appearance of Jesus since he was
12 years old in the temple and marks the beginning of his ministry.
Dr. Harold Hoehner convincingly marks the beginning of John the
Baptist's ministry as "sometime in AD 29" with Jesus' ministry
beginning very shortly after the beginning of John the Baptist's;
most likely during summer or autumn of that
year.^[[2]](#note-ftn2)^ The baptism of the people of Israel stands
as a sudden and dramatic shift of God's people towards him in a new
and generally unexpected way. Concerning this move of Jewish
baptism Barclay wrote:

> "It is the fact that never in all history before this had any Jew
> submitted to being baptized. The Jews knew and used baptism, but
> only for proselytes who came into Judaism from some other faith. It
> was natural that the sin-stained, polluted proselyte should be
> baptized, but no Jew had ever conceived that he, a member of the
> chosen people, a son of Abraham, assured of God's salvation, could
> ever need baptism. Baptism was for sinners, and no Jew ever
> conceived of himself as a sinner shut out from God. Now for the
> first time in their national history the Jews realized their own
> sin and their own claimant need of God,. Never before had there
> been such a unique national movement of penitence and of search for
> God."^[[3]](#note-ftn3)^

Yet for perhaps months the people of Israel had been coming from
great distances to be baptized by John the Baptist whose prophetic
garb and powerful preaching had shamelessly confronted sin and yet
graciously accepted the repentant sinners. As John labors in
anticipation and watches (John 1:31) for the revelation of Messiah,
Jesus comes to him.

### Textual Variation

Textually, this section is theologically certain. While there are
minor variants, no major doctrine is affected.^[[4]](#note-0)^



## Syntax and Exegesis

### Matthew 3:13

The temporal adverb (then) serves to connect these events to the
introduction of the then unknown Messiah which John delivers in
Matthew 3:11-12. It also demonstrates that the current passage
occurs not long after John's announcement. Of the eighty-nine times
Matthew uses Τότε, more than half of the time its use is to draw a
close chronological connection or to point out a response to the
prior section. Dr. Hoehner dates the coming of John the Baptist to
the year 29AD and the resultant baptism of Jesus during the summer
or fall of the same year.^[[5]](#note-ftn21)^

The appearance of Jesus is significant in this passage because it
is his first autonomous activity. As far as Matthew's gospel is
concerned we have only seen him as a secondary participant up to
this point. His birth, move to Egypt and subsequent move to
Nazareth have all been actions centered in his mother and Joseph.
Now for the first time, Jesus becomes the central actor. By tying
the introduction of Jesus then to the activity of John the Baptist,
Matthew effectively demonstrates for his Jewish readers that Jesus
is fulfilling the Messianic prophecies of scripture (Matthew 3:3,
Isaiah 40:3).

The reader is drawn into the scene by the same historical present
verb (παραγίνεται= He came) which is used in the first verse of the
chapter concerning John. So that as John came dramatically onto the
scene with a distinctive purpose, so also does Jesus.

While Matthew informs that Jesus came from Galilee, the parallel
passage in Mark 1:9 is more specific concerning Jesus' geographic
origin as being from the town of Nazareth in the region of Galilee.
The three day^[[6]](#note-ftn22)^ journey would have been about
sixty miles,^[[7]](#note-ftn23)^ no doubt entirely on foot.

The NLT^[[8]](#note-ftn27)^ similarly renders the accusative
Ἰωάννην and its associated prepositional phrase πρὸς τὸν Ἰωάννην as
though it were an adverbial accusative of manner, “to be baptized
by John.” While needlessly clarifying the role of John as the
baptizer it also conceals the fact that Jesus came to him; which is
probably intended to parallel the coming of all the people to John
(πρὸς αὐτὸν) in verse 5. “The use of the preposition πρὸς with the
accusative case ... sometimes comes close to the dative of indirect
object..."^[[9]](#note-ftn28)^ This is in keeping with the normal
use of the preposition as described by ANLEX^[[10]](#note-ftn29)^
and Zodhiates.^[[11]](#note-ftn30)^ Thus the prepositional phrase
πρὸς τὸν Ἰωάννην functions as the indirect object of the verb
παραγίνεται indicating that Jesus came to John who was at the
Jordan. The full force of Jesus coming "to John at the Jordan" is
reflected in the HCSB^[[12]](#note-ftn31)^,
NASB95^[[13]](#note-ftn32)^ and the NKJV.^[[14]](#note-ftn33)^

The reason that he came is expressed in the purpose clause τοῦ
βαπτισθῆναι ὑπ᾽αὐτοῦ. The genitive article stands before the
infinitive as a genitive of purpose.^[[15]](#note-ftn34)^ Barclay
mentions an unnamed early writer^[[16]](#note-ftn35)^ who,
"suggested that Jesus came to be baptized only to please his mother
and his brothers, and that it was in answer to their entreaties
that he was almost compelled to let this thing to be
done."^[[17]](#note-ftn36)^ However the next verse offers its own
reasons. Righteousness is at stake and fulfilling it requires the
lesser to baptize the greater. That is a move which John will try
to prevent.

### Matthew 3:14

[[Image:]]The conjunction δὲ serves to move the reader off of the
main event of the baptism onto a dialog between Jesus and John.1
The article ὁ begins the sentence and in the case of Ἰωάννης not
being part of the text as discussed in “Textual Variants” above
(p6) would function as a pronoun . The force of δὲ as an
adversative conjunction would then become a "switch-reference
device"^[[18]](#note-ftn38)^ indicating that the speaker indicated
by the article is no longer Jesus requesting baptism but rather has
become John trying to prevent Jesus. Either way it is clear that
John is now the speaker whose actions and speech exhibit a
misunderstanding of what exactly Jesus is coming for. The baptizer
rightly perceived a moral mismatch between himself and Jesus and
thus when Jesus came to him, he tried unsuccessfully to stop him
from being baptized.

Matthew is the only synoptic writer to comment on this discussion.
Some commentators seem to think Matthew inserted the discussion to
protect against the opinion that Jesus had sins to repent of. The
verb διεκώλυεν is a tendential imperfect^[[19]](#note-ftn39)^
indicating that John's attempt at prevention was at least vocal.
Most modern versions adequately capture the incomplete and
unsuccessful nature of John's attempt by saying in some way that
John "tried" to stop Jesus. The KJV however simply translates it
almost as an historic aorist using the archaic "forbad".

The adverbial complimentary participle λέγων describes how it was
that John tried to prevent Jesus' baptism. There is no indication
either in favor of or against John pushing Jesus away or otherwise
physically attempting to stop his cousin. Nevertheless it was a
passionate speech which John must have begun with Jesus. The
personal pronoun ἐγὼ intensifies the contrast^[[20]](#note-ftn40)^
between John (ἐγὼ) and Jesus (σοῦ); and effectively demonstrates
John's apparent dismay that Jesus would come to him.

While it seems evident that his argument is based on Jesus not
needing baptism, the first reason given is John's personal
acknowledgment of sin. "I have need...," John says, placing the
noun χρείαν^[[21]](#note-ftn41)^ in the forward position for
emphasis. Keener argues that John was seeking a baptism which is
different in kind than that which John had been offering "...John
recognized that Jesus had come to bestow the Spirit in fuller
measure than even he as a prophet had received, and he desired this
baptism..."^[[22]](#note-ftn42)^ But John 1:33 indicates that John
the Baptist was not fully aware of Jesus' identity until after the
baptism. Therefore it could not have been his knowledge of Jesus
being the Christ which motivated this statement. John must have had
some other knowledge of Jesus.

Considering that John and Jesus were cousins it is more than likely
that they had been exposed one to the other over the prior 30
years. It could be argued that Elizabeth would surely have told
John repeatedly about the unique birth of Jesus and thus pointed to
his identity. But the greater weight must be given to the Johanine
indication that the Baptist remained uncertain concerning the
Messiah's identity until he saw the dove.

While they were separated by many miles we could at the very least
consider that from the time of 12 years and beyond, Jesus and John
would have accompanied their parents to the Holy City for the three
pilgrimage feasts which were required of every male in Israel. It
is hard to comprehend that at such festive times, extended family
would remain separated by what had become minimal distance. Thus at
least sporadically John had been exposed to the character of Jesus.
He was not therefore at this point seeking the Spirit and fire
baptism which he personally announced in Matthew 3:11. Standing in
the Jordan river with his cousin, John saw his own need for baptism
as he presented his own confession,^[[23]](#note-ftn43)^ and
subsequently requested to be baptized (βαπτισθῆναι). Young
identifies this as an epexegetical use of the infinitive explaining
what is meant by the noun χρείαν.^[[24]](#note-ftn44)^

In the second half of his protest John registers his awe with Jesus
with the question: “Καὶ σὺ ἔρχη πρός με?” The καὶ is not merely
connective but serves (contrary to Young^[[25]](#note-ftn45)^) to
provide a contrastive sense translated best as "and
yet."^[[26]](#note-ftn46)^ The Holman Christian Standard Bible
(HCSB), NAB and the NET, bring out the full contrast of the
καίtranslating it properly. Both personal pronouns σὺ and με are
emphatic^[[27]](#note-ftn47)^ which helps to illuminate the
contrastive sense of the the καί. The verb ἔρχῃ is a perfective
present indicating that Jesus came and at the time still remained
in front of John. The brief prepositional phrase πρός με simply
indicates that Jesus came to John for the understood purpose of
baptism.

It is almost impossible to miss the irony of the Baptist needing to
be baptized. That fact alone however does give the reader a
sufficient reason to pause and consider just who this Jesus might
be to create such a response. In a literary sense the reader is now
leaning forward in his seat in order to hear what comes next. The
reader will not be disappointed.

### Matthew 3:15

[[Image:]]he post positive δὲ serves as a full adversative
demonstrating that Jesus' answer (ἀποκριθεὶς) is set in
juxtaposition to John's dissent and is delivered directly to John
(πρὸς αὐτόν). The answer of ὁ Ἰησοῦς is explained with the somewhat
awkward to translate phrase, ἀποκριθεὶς ... εἶπεν “answering he
said”. The NIV^[[28]](#note-ftn48)^ and NET both translate
ἀποκριθεὶς ... εἶπεν as "replied" while others like HCSB,
ESV^[[29]](#note-ftn49)^ and NRSV^[[30]](#note-ftn50)^ use
"answered".

The answer of Christ however proves to be somewhat enigmatic. First
he commands John to permit the baptism for the moment. ἄφες is
futuristic aorist imperative of command combined with the temporal
adverb ἄρτι. It is almost as if Jesus agrees with John's conclusion
in the prior verse but still he will not be dissuaded. Something
greater than John's righteousness is at stake in this baptism.
Indeed it might be said that John's righteousness was at stake in a
far more significant manner than he imagined.

The second part of Christ's answer to John is the reason, expressed
by the conjunction γὰρ, which John must allow the baptism. The
adverb of manner οὕτως points back to the preceding mention of
baptism and prepares us for the predicate adjectival participle
πρέπον^[[31]](#note-ftn51)^ which together with ἐστὶν serves as a
periphrastic present^[[32]](#note-ftn52)^ providing an emphasis on
the propriety of the baptism in question and its effects concerning
Jesus Christ. The effects of the baptism are described as “πληρῶσαι
πᾶσαν δικαιοσύνην.” The infinitive of purpose πληρῶσαι functions as
the subject^[[33]](#note-ftn53)^ of the verb phrase πρέπον ἐστὶν.
The adjectival phrase πᾶσαν δικαιοσύνην functions as the direct
object. Thus, it is proper for John and Jesus to fulfill all
righteousness by means of this baptism.

How exactly the baptism fulfills all righteousness is the question
which is not inherently answered in the grammar of the New
Testament. As Hare notes, that question has plagued interpreters
from the church fathers and forward.^[[34]](#note-ftn54)^ Jesus did
not need to be forgiven. So what is it that makes this "proper"?
Robertson improperly speculates^[[35]](#note-ftn55)^ that Jesus
would have appeared aloof from John and his ministry if he had not
been baptized. There were certainly other ways, however, that he
could be seen with John or introduced by the Baptist without
bringing the *appearance* of prior guilt upon himself by partaking
in a baptism of repentance. John recognized that Jesus had no prior
sin and balked at his request at least in part because perceived
that Jesus had no sins to repent of. Further, the forerunner did
not need to baptize Jesus in order to recognize him, but had only
to see the Spirit land on him in order to identify him (John 1:33).
This anointing could easily have happened apart from a water
baptism. Therefore it was the baptism itself which fulfilled all
righteousness rather than some merely visible attempt to join their
ministries in the minds of the Jews.

It must be understood that righteousness is not a legal term as
though Jesus was under Mosaic Law code compulsion to be baptized,
else John would have known the Mosaic text in question and would
not have tried to prevent him. Matthew's normal use of the term
righteousness "describes the natural and inevitable response to God
by his people."^[[36]](#note-ftn56)^ It is possible then that Jesus
must have understood the Father's will to be that he undergo
baptism. Since the nature of baptism is primarily one of
identification; the revealed will of the Father to Jesus was very
likely that by partaking in Baptism, the sinless one would be
identified with sinners.^[[37]](#note-ftn57)^

The baptism of repentance which John was performing was for the
identification of the righteous with the old testament law for it
was the breeches in the law which were being confessed. And it was
a renewed commitment to live in righteousness which the crowds were
committing to. This is why John could order the Pharisees to start
producing fruit in keeping with the repentance they were claiming
to have at the baptism (Mat. 3:8). In this manner when Jesus was
baptized in the same baptism, though he had no sins of his own to
confess he was identified with the transgressors (Isa. 53:12; Lk.
22:37). "...in his baptism he identified himself with the men, he
came to save..."^[[38]](#note-ftn58)^

The baptism of Jesus is the beginning of the exchange of his life
for the sinner. It is in this way, as the sinless one is baptized
on our behalf that all righteousness is fulfilled. It is our
righteousness being fulfilled in Christ our substitute, rather than
Jesus being made righteous in the baptism. Regarding the
sinlessness of Christ and the substitution occurring here Kistmaker
wrote: "The objection may be raised that the water of baptism
symbolized the removal of filth, that is, sin; and that, since
Jesus was sinless, he did not need to be, and could not properly
be, baptized. The answer is that he did, after all, have sin,
namely ours."^[[39]](#note-ftn59)^

Having been convinced by Jesus' reply, Matthew summarizes John's
response with a succinct, “τότε ἀφίησιν αὐτόν.” Keener notes that
the same language is used in Matthew 4:11 to describe Satan's
departure. Thus, according to Keener, Matthew hints that John had
unwittingly taken the devil's side in trying to deter Jesus'
baptism.^[[40]](#note-ftn60)^ But that would be inconsistent with
Matthew's overall positive picture of John as the announcer of the
redeemer. Due to the order in which the events are presented it is
more likely that the former event would shed light on the latter.
Thus hinting that the Devil was convinced of his inability to stop
Jesus at least on the occasion of the desert temptations and
accordingly left Jesus to himself for the time being.

The KJV^[[41]](#note-ftn61)^ translation "suffer" is archaic and in
the modern usage renders an unfortunate concept of grudging
compliance which is not indicated by the text. Whether or not John
fully understood the reason, or as is more likely he simply trusted
Jesus, he obeyed.

### Matthew 3:16

[[Image:]]Apart from the fact that Jesus confessed no personal sin
as he was being baptized, the process of baptism probably did not
vary from the several which John had already performed. As Jesus
came up out of the water however, all heaven broke loose.

The conjunction δὲ functions transitionally to introduce a new
development and serves to return us to the main focus from the
conversation initiated by the δὲ in 3:14.^[[42]](#note-ftn62)^ The
temporal adverbial participle βαπτισθεὶς qualifies the main verb
ἀνέβη as does the temporal adverb εὐθὺς. The combined double
qualifier together with the culminative aorist ἀνέβη serves to
picture the departure of Jesus from the water as completed. There
could be some question as to whether the timing is in reference to
Jesus standing up after going under the water or if it refers to
him walking out of the water after the entire baptismal ceremony.
The temporal adjectival adverb εὐθὺς seems to indicate that the
descent of the Spirit began to happen as soon as Jesus had finished
standing up to complete the cycle of baptism.

The adjunctive καί^[[43]](#note-ftn63)^ introduces the exclamatory
interjection ἰδοὺ. This construction is repeated in v17. In fact
the phrase is used 28 times^[[44]](#note-ftn64)^ in the book of
Matthew. In almost every instance it serves to draw the reader's
attention to a new and often unexpected
development.^[[45]](#note-ftn65)^

Luke 3:21 reveals that Jesus was praying as he came out of the
water and it was as he prayed that the heavens were opened
(ἠνεῴχθησαν) meaning that visibly either the crowd, John, Jesus or
a mixture of any of the three were enabled to see into the realm of
glory. Else it could graphically indicate that the interaction
between God and Mankind was about to take on a completely new venue
in the person of Jesus (cf. Hebrews 1:1-2). From a visual
standpoint it is nearly impossible to determine what was seen. The
dramatic aorist however probably points Matthew's Jewish readers to
the opening of Ezekiel in which the heavens are opened to the
prophet in preparation for his ministry.

As discussed in Textual Variants^[[46]](#note-ftn66)^ the pronoun
αὐτῷ is uncertain in the text. Initially it is not entirely clear
if everyone else was able to see what Jesus saw. The HCSB
translates the questionable αὐτῷ as a dative of advantage “...the
heavens suddenly opened for Him..." This is also done in
parenthesis in the New American Bible. The KJV and ESV, NRSV, Darby
(1890) translate it as a dative of indirect object "...the heavens
were opened unto / to him..." The NIV and NASB95 both opt to
discard the personal pronoun omitting it altogether from the
translation. If the pronoun belongs in the text however, it is
likely functioning as a dative of advantage. While the opening of
the heavens would be for the benefit of Jesus as indicated by the
usage of the personal pronoun σὺ in the divine pronouncement of
Mark 1:11 and Luke 3:22;^[[47]](#note-ftn67)^ that would permit the
others present, at least John (cf John 3:13) to see and hear both
the audible (v17) and visual event which Jesus saw and heard.

Jesus saw (εἶδεν) [τὸ] πνεῦμα [τοῦ] θεοῦ. </nowiki\>The genitive of
description indicates that the Spirit in question is God's Spirit
in particular. The days of Jesus and John the Baptist were not
marked by a deep sense of the Spirit's involvement. Keener
expresses the Jewish mindset:

> "Many believed that the Spirit was no longer available in their
> time; others believed that the Spirit simply did not work as
> forcefully as in the days of the prophets, until the time of the
> end. That the Spirit comes on Jesus indicates the inauguration of
> the messianic era and marks Jesus out as the Spirit-bearer and
> hence Messiah (3:11)."^[[48]](#note-ftn68)^

The Spirit came down ὡσεὶ περιστερὰν. The adverb of manner ὡσεὶ
could be demonstrating that the Spirit descended the way a dove
would. However, Luke's gospel (3:22) clarifies with an adjective
(σωματικῷ) that the Spirit came in the form of a dove's body. The
Spirit-dove came down and ἐρχόμενον ἐπ᾽ αὐτόν.

The Spirit in [Theophany](Theophany "Theophany") as a dove is
significant. More often the Father or Son is visually seen in
various physical forms throughout the Old Testament. Symbolically
the dove was the only bird permitted as a sacrifice under the
Levitical sacrificial system.^[[49]](#note-ftn69)^ The dove was
typically reserved for the most poverty stricken members of
Israelite society. It is conceivable that Matthew's audience would
have recognized this and recognized Jesus as the sacrifice for all
including the poor. In addition to the Levitical sacrifice
connection the dove has two major parallel symbolisms.

First, the image of the Spirit as dove recalls the other
significant appearance of the Holy Spirit at least in dove like
language from the opening words of Genesis. There the Spirit hovers
over the surface of the waters in preparation for the new work
about to be initiated. Second, the dove is symbolic of the end of
judgment as the dove returns to Noah with the olive leaf at the end
of the flood^[[50]](#note-ftn70)^ initiating an image of peace
which endures to this day. All three of these symbolic connections
to the dove come to fullness in Christ. He is the creator through
and for whom all things are made as well as the herald of the end
of judgment which he himself has absorbed as the all encompassing
sacrifice.

### Matthew 3:17

[[Image:]]When the crowds came to John for baptism they confessed
their sins (Mat. 3:6). But Jesus makes no confession, he is praying
(Luke 3:21). The only voice heard at Jesus' baptism is indeed a
confession but it is the Father's confession of Jesus' identity.
There is a sense in which this baptism is the inauguration of the
king. The exclamatory phrase καὶ ἰδοὺ again turns the reader's
attention to another new and unexpected event.^[[51]](#note-ftn71)^
The prior event was visible, this second event is auditory. A voice
is heard coming out of the heavens. The anarthrous φωνὴ most likely
focuses on the character of the voice rather than trying to
classify it in other ways.^[[52]](#note-ftn72)^ The prepositional
phrase ἐκ τῶν οὐρανῶν concludes with the ablative of
source.^[[53]](#note-ftn73)^ The verbal participle λέγουσα
functions as an indicative verb and reveals the content of the
voice's statement.

The content of the message is primarily that of identification.
This announcement identifies for the reader, and presumably for
those standing by, just exactly who Jesus is. The demonstrative
pronoun οὗτός referring to Jesus plays a crucial role in revealing
Matthew's intent concerning the disputed dative pronoun
αὐτῷ^[[54]](#note-ftn74)^ as well as helping to discern whether or
not the crowds and even John the Baptist were able to hear and see
these miracles as opposed to them being merely subjectively
experienced by Jesus alone. Both Mark 1:11 and Luke 3:22 use the
definite pronouns σὺ and σοὶ where Matthew uses οὗτός and the
relative pronoun ᾧ. This would appear to indicate in Mark and Luke
that the Father was speaking directly to Jesus. While in the
similar occurrence of a voice from heaven speaking in John 12:28-ff
the people did not understand the voice, there is no indication in
either of the other synoptic gospels whether the people surrounding
the area understood this voice or not. Matthew apparently opted to
change the pronouns in order to clarify that the identification was
for the benefit of the people. The voice declares to all who are
gathered that, "This one is my beloved son".

The NIV, CJB^[[55]](#note-ftn75)^ and NJB^[[56]](#note-ftn76)^ are
unique in translating ὁ ἀγαπητός‚ as a compound predicate
nominative with ὁ υἱός, treating the nominative article as a
pronoun. The classic second attributive position however should
take precedent here so that ὁ ἀγαπητός modifies ὁ υἱός μου. The
description of Jesus as the beloved son of God is particularly
important in view of Jesus' mission as expressed in John 3:16.
Jesus came to die for the world of people whom God loved. The fact
that God loved the son elevates the sacrifice made to an even
higher plain. The transaction of salvation is not the trading of
one barely liked individual (the Son) for a multitude of that which
is beloved. This is an undeserved exchange of one super-precious
being for another loved group of beings.

The phrase, "my beloved son," is a direct quotation from the
Messianic Psalm 2:7 which is called a royal enthronement Psalm by
Blomberg^[[57]](#note-ftn77)^ It was here that God the Father
commissions Jesus as the king of the Jews. Even as David was
anointed years before he could assume the throne and endured
suffering beforehand, so also Jesus was anointed and suffered prior
to his yet pending and final enthronement. The identity of the
voice is now certain. With a fuller knowledge of Christology it
becomes immediately evident that the voice is none less than God
the Father. It is certainly not an angel as the bystanders of John
12:28-*ff* thought that voice might be.

The second phrase ἐν ᾧ εὐδόκησα is a direct quotation from Isaiah
42:1. Hagner considers both quotations as allusions to the Isaiah
passage which is a statement concerning the anointing of the
servant of God with the Spirit in order to enable the servant to
accomplish his task.^[[58]](#note-ftn78)^ The preposition ἐν with
the dative of interest ᾧ^[[59]](#note-ftn79)^ functions with the
gnomic aorist εὐδόκησα to express that God has always approved of
Jesus and thus of course continues to do so. There is a great deal
of dispute regarding the classification of this term.

A.T Robertson debates whether this is gnomic or timeless aorist
stating that the gnomic is not clear.^[[60]](#note-ftn80)^ Brooks
and Winbery describe it as a dramatic aorist believing that it puts
a greater emphasis on "recent attainment."^[[61]](#note-ftn81)^
However, there is more in view than simply the baptism of Christ.
As the introduction to his ministry the statement of God's pleasure
in Jesus establishes that the life and person-hood of Jesus up
until this point have been acceptable.

When a lamb is selected for slaughter it must first be deemed
acceptable by the offerer. Thereupon it is then separated from the
flock and set apart for ministry. Here at the outset of Jesus'
ministry he is being set apart for slaughter. This baptism serves
as a ceremonial selection of the lamb of God - thus God's statement
declaring that Jesus has achieved and retains the Father's
pleasure. Jesus will repeatedly refer to the Father's love and
pleasure for him throughout his ministry.^[[62]](#note-ftn82)^

Burton argues against this is functioning as a culminative aorist,
preferring to call it a comprehensive historical aorist. He writes,
"But against this is the absence of any adverbial phrase meaning up
to this time, which usually accompanies an Aorist verb used in this
sense."^[[63]](#note-ftn83)^ The term "usually" however does not
mean "always." Burton's main argument seems to be a problem with
the aorist in some way indicating that Jesus at one point *became*
acceptable to God thus suggesting in some way that there might be a
point when he was not. He therefore argues against interpretations
which would refer to Jesus becoming acceptable during his life on
earth or during his eternity. He finally chooses to refer to this
as "an Inceptive Aorist equivalent to an English Perfect. [which]
judges the existing result to be only suggested by the affirmation
of the past fact."^[[64]](#note-ftn84)^

However the gnomic aorist appears to best fit the requirement that
Jesus is not really described as "becoming acceptable" but rather
emphasizes that Jesus simply *is* acceptable and pleasing to the
Father and always has been.^[[65]](#note-ftn85)^ The termεὐδόκησα
expresses a fullness of approval. It is not that the Father looked
down and approved just then of Jesus. But there is a full and
complete approval of all that Jesus is and has been which is
communicated.

Both phrases are also repeated in the transfiguration narrative in
Matthew 17:5 with the addition of ἀκούετε αὐτοῦ, "listen to him."
Both instances, the transfiguration as well as the baptism, form a
different aspect of the end goal of Christ's earthly ministry. The
baptism symbolizes his death, burial and resurrection (compare Rom.
6:3-4). While the transfiguration prefigures his glorification
after the resurrection. In each instance the Father proclaims the
identity of and his love for his son.

One can hardly miss the baptism of Jesus Christ as a significant
theological event marking one of the few locations in the gospels
where the Trinity is uniquely present and active. Davies and
Allison speculate that this text is responsible for the
proliferation of Trinitarian baptismal texts throughout the New
Testament. To which purpose they write:

> "Mt 3:16-17, which was interpreted by later Christian theology as
> depicting the supreme manifestation of the Trinity, is only one of
> several NT baptismal texts in which the Father, Son, and Holy
> Spirit are present; see Mt 28:16-20; Jn 1:33-34; Acts 2:38-9;
> 10:38; 1 Cor 6:11; Tit 3:4-6; 1 Pet 1:2 ... Why the NT should
> contain so many triadic baptismal texts is far from obvious. But
> the ultimate cause could be the story of Jesus baptism by John, in
> which God the Father speaks to his Son and the Holy Spirit comes
> upon him."^[[66]](#note-ftn86)^

As all three persons of the Trinity are represented in these last
two verses of the passage. So too at the close of his gospel
Matthew records the baptismal formula which mandates disciples be
baptized in the name of the Father, Son and the Spirit (Matthew
28:19). Indeed it seems quite intentional on Matthew's part to set
the entire earthly ministry of Jesus within the inclusio of a
Trinitarian baptismal event.

## Explanation

The last time we saw Jesus he was in Galilee. We might have been
wondering where he was and why sudden attention had been given to
John the Baptist. But it was necessary that we meet John for two
reasons, First so that we could see him calling the people of
Israel to repentance and baptizing them as they responded (Matthew
3:1-2, 5-6). Secondly, we needed to hear John announce the coming
of the Messiah (Matthew 3:11-12). It was, in a manner of speaking,
immediately after his announcement that Jesus comes to John who was
at the Jordan (Mat. 3:6) in order to be baptized by him. Like all
the crowds before him, Jesus walked into the Jordan river where
John was, expressing his desire to be baptized. Keener stands alone
in noting the inherent humility displayed by Jesus at his baptism,
"In a traditional Mediterranean culture where society stressed
honor and shame, Jesus relinquishes his rightful honor to embrace
other's shame. After Jesus' public act of humility, God publicly
identified Jesus as his own son..."^[[67]](#note-ftn87)^

John was aware, to a certain extent, who Jesus was at least in his
character. It is doubtful that his mother Elizabeth would have kept
the nature of Jesus' birth a secret from John who himself was a
miraculous baby. Those are the kinds of stories which are told
repeatedly to children as they grow up. John grew up in the hill
country of Judah (Luke 1:39) while Jesus was growing up in Galilee.
Nevertheless they very likely had some exposure to each other
growing up despite the distance even if only at the yearly feasts
in Jerusalem. Even today it is common among extended families to
know something of the character of other children. John surely
would have at least heard stories about "what a good boy" Jesus was
and coupled those stories with those of his birth.

Before John was even born the fullness of the Spirit of God led him
to know Jesus for who he was (cf Luke 1:15). This does not mean
that John knew for certain in adulthood that Jesus was the Messiah
however. John 1:32-34 reveals that the Baptist did not recognize
Jesus as the one who "baptizes in the Holy Spirit" until after he
saw the Holy Spirit come on Jesus in the form of a dove. He may
have suspected it prior to this moment but confirmation of his
identity was needed - not only now, but also later in Matthew
11:3.

Against this backdrop of knowledge John the Baptist came preaching
repentance and spent a good part of his days baptizing and
preaching to the crowds that came out to him. He would baptize them
as they confessed their sins (Matthew 3:6). As far as John knew
however, Jesus had no sins to confess. For this apparent reason,
John started to prevent Jesus from going through with the baptism.
A certain amount of shock or awe is evident in the emphatic use of
the personal pronouns as John declares his own sin by implying that
he is more sinful than Jesus and suggesting that they switch
places. Jesus however understood more than did John. The Lord
responds to his stunned cousin that he must permit the baptism
because it is proper for them to fulfill all righteousness in this
manner.

Baptism is not a means to repentance but rather a symbol of it. If
it were a means to repentance or rather a means to salvation than
it would indeed have been inappropriate for Jesus to be baptized by
John. For in the baptism the sinless one would have been making a
false claim to sin. Rather he was making a definite identification
with sinners. It is in this sense that the baptism of Jesus is the
beginning of our redemption.

As Jesus came out of the water the heavens were opened and the Holy
Spirit - in the form of a dove - came down and landed upon Jesus
anointing him for ministry. A voice also came from the heavens. God
the Father proclaiming the identity of Jesus as his son.

## Application

Even as John suddenly saw his own need for baptism in the presence
of Christ, we too might think we are good enough until we come into
the presence of perfection. The bright lights of holiness cause
what we might consider to be a "minor stain" to be displayed for
what it is, a blood red indelible mark. Even today the leaders and
shepherds who would guide others to God have need themselves to be
cleansed by Christ.

Once Jesus replied, John simply obeyed even if he did not fully
understand. This too serves as a model for us. Obedience is not
contingent upon understanding, but merely upon hearing the command
and trusting the Lord who commands.

The very same Spirit of God which fills, directs and empowers
believers today is the very Spirit of God which filled, directed
and empowered the Son of God. When the Spirit came upon Jesus his
ministry began. That is where ministry begins for every believer.
If you have been baptized into the name of the Father, Son and
Spirit, than you are baptized by the Spirit into service.

Some of the enormity of God's love for us is seen in the fact that
he loved Jesus as well and described him in the very intimate terms
of "beloved son". One of the most common verses committed to memory
is John 3:16, telling us that "God so loved the world..." That God
loved the world is not contrastive to the love he had for Jesus but
rather ascensive. Because he loved the son, the sacrifice for you
and I is even greater than we might have thought.

A key requirement of salvation is acknowledging that Jesus Christ
is Lord (Rom. 10:9). This passage, which marks the inauguration of
Jesus into ministry is a definitive statement concerning his
identity as deity. God the Father has set his seal on Jesus - it
behooves us therefore to listen to him (Mat. 17:5). It is in our
favor now to watch the rest of this gospel unfold with a full
knowledge that Jesus is the King of Glory.

## Conclusion

In the scheme of Matthew, Jesus is presented to Israel as her king.
The baptism of Jesus identifies the humble Messiah with his people.
The visible anointing by the Holy Spirit empowers him and the
coronation speech given by the Father establishes his identity.
God's multiplied promises to send a Savior have been fulfilled and
now proclaimed to the repentant ones of Israel.



## Footnotes

1.  [↑](#ref-ftn1_0) John
    MacArthur,*1 Corinthians, Includes Indexes*. (Chicago: Moody Press,
    1996, c1984), p. 266.
2.  [↑](#ref-ftn2_0) Dr. Harold W. Hoehner,
    *Chronological Aspects of the Life of Christ*, (Grand Rapids:
    Zondervan, Academie Books, 1975), pp. 37, 44.
3.  [↑](#ref-ftn3_0) The Gospel of Matthew : Volume, ed. William
    Barclay, lecturer in the University of Glasgow, The Daily study
    Bible series, Rev. ed. (Philadelphia: The Westminster Press, 2000,
    c1975), p. 59.
4.  [↑](#ref-0) For a complete discussion of the textual variation
    in this section see
    [[Variation in Matthew 3:13-17](http://www.stilltruth.com/node/797)]
    at Stilltruth.com
5.  [↑](#ref-ftn21_0) Hoehner, *Chronological Aspects* pp. 37, 44.
6.  [↑](#ref-ftn22_0) Based on an average traveling speed of two to
    three miles per hour for an adult.
7.  [↑](#ref-ftn23_0) William MacDonald and Arthur Farstad,
    Believer's Bible Commentary : Old and New Testaments (Nashville:
    Thomas Nelson, 1997, c1995), Mt 3:13.
8.  [↑](#ref-ftn27_0) Tyndale House Publishers, Holy Bible :
    *New Living Translation., "Text Edition"--Spine., 2nd ed*.
    (Wheaton, Ill.: Tyndale House Publishers, 2004), Mt 3:13.
9.  [↑](#ref-ftn28_0) Brooks and Winbery p. 157-158
10. [↑](#ref-ftn29_0) "literally, to show motion toward a person or
    thing *to, toward*; after verbs of going..."Timothy Friberg,
    Barbara Friberg and Neva F. Miller, vol. 4,
    *Analytical Lexicon of the Greek New Testament, Baker's Greek New Testament library*
    (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker Books, 2000), p 330.
11. [↑](#ref-ftn30_0) "With the acc., marking the object toward or
    to which something moves or is directed. ...Of place, thing, or
    person meaning toward, to, unto, as if in answer to the question
    "Whither?" With the acc. of place, thing, person: ... Particularly
    of motion or direction after verbs of going, coming, departing,
    returning..." Spiros Zodhiates,
    *The Complete Word Study Dictionary : New Testament, electronic ed*.
    (Chattanooga, TN: AMG Publishers, 2000, c1992, c1993), G4314.
12. [↑](#ref-ftn31_0)
    *The Holy Bible : Holman Christian Standard Version*. (Nashville:
    Holman Bible Publishers, 2003), Matthew 3:13.
13. [↑](#ref-ftn32_0)
    *New American Standard Bible : 1995 Update.*(LaHabra, CA: The
    Lockman Foundation, 1995), Matthew 3:13.
14. [↑](#ref-ftn33_0) *The New King James Version*. (Nashville:
    Thomas Nelson, 1982), Matthew 3:13.
15. [↑](#ref-ftn34_0) Richard A. Young,
    *Intermediate New Testament Greek A Linguistic and Exegetical Approach*.
    (Nashville, TN:Broadman & Holman Publishers. 1994), p. 168.
16. [↑](#ref-ftn35_0) It is possible that the writer in question is
    Jerome: "Gospel according to the Hebrews (in Jerome, Against
    Pelagius III.2). â€” The mother of the Lord and his brothers said
    to him, "John the Baptist baptizes for the forgiveness of sins; let
    us go and be baptized by him." But he said to them, "In what way
    have I sinned that I should go and be baptized by him? Unless,
    perhaps, what I have just said is a sin of ignorance."Burton H.
    Throckmorton, Jr,
    *Gospel Parallels-NRSV : A Comparison of the Synoptic Gospels, With Alternative Readings from the Manuscripts and Noncanonical Parallels.; Text Used Is the New Revised Standard Version, 1989.; The Arrangement Follows the Huck-Lietzmann Synopsis, Ninth Edition, 1936*.
    (Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 1997, c1992). footnote from Â§6.
17. [↑](#ref-ftn36_0)
    *The Gospel of Matthew : Volume, ed. William Barclay, lecturer in the University of Glasgow, The Daily study Bible series, Rev. ed*.
    (Philadelphia: The Westminster Press, 2000, c1975), p. 59.
18. [↑](#ref-ftn38_0) Young, Intermediate New Testament Greek. p.
    59.
19. [↑](#ref-ftn39_0) Young, *Intermediate New Testament Greek* . p
    114. Compare Brooks and Winbery p. 93.
20. [↑](#ref-ftn40_0) A.T. Robertson,
    *A Grammar of the Greek New Testament in the Light of Historical Research*
    (Logos, 1919; 2006), p 677.
21. [↑](#ref-ftn41_0) Robertson calls this an accusative absolute
    (*Grammar* p. 1392.)
22. [↑](#ref-ftn42_0) Craig S. Keener,
    *A commentary on the Gospel of Matthew*. (Grand Rapids, MI: William
    B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1999), p. 132.
23. [↑](#ref-ftn43_0) Fredric W. Farrar, *The Life of Christ (*Salt
    Lake City, Utah: Bookcraft, 1874, 1875, 1999), p. 111.
24. [↑](#ref-ftn44_0) *Intermediate New Testament Greek* p. 175.
    Compare Brooks and Winbery p. 141.
25. [↑](#ref-ftn45_0) Young classifies this use of καὶ as
    "conclusion" preferring the translation "Since I have need to be
    baptized by you, then [καὶ] why do you come to me?" Young,
    *Intermediate New Testament Greek* p. 189.
26. [↑](#ref-ftn46_0) Confer L.S. καί, and Robertson-Grammar: “The
    context gives other turns to καί that are sometimes rather
    startling. It is common to find καί where it has to bear the
    content ‘and yet.’ ... Cf. also Mt. 3:14, καὶ σὺ ἔρχῃ πρός με;”
    Robertson, *Grammar* p. 1182.
27. [↑](#ref-ftn47_0) Robertson, *Grammar* p. 234.
28. [↑](#ref-ftn48_0)
    *The Holy Bible : New International Version, electronic ed*. (Grand
    Rapids: Zondervan, 1996, c1984), Mt 3:15.
29. [↑](#ref-ftn49_0) *The Holy Bible : English Standard Version*
    (Wheaton: Standard Bible Society, 2001), Mt 3:15.
30. [↑](#ref-ftn50_0)
    *The Holy Bible : New Revised Standard Version* (Nashville: Thomas
    Nelson Publishers, 1989), Mt 3:15.
31. [↑](#ref-ftn51_0) Participle functioning as a predicate
    adjective to the dative pronoun ἡμῖν. (compare Brooks and Winbery
    p. 145.)
32. [↑](#ref-ftn52_0) Robertson, *Grammar* p. 880.
33. [↑](#ref-ftn53_0) Brooks and Winbery p. 139.Compare: Ernest De
    Witt Burton,
    *Syntax of the Moods and Tenses in New Testament Greek, 3rd ed*.
    (Edinburg: T. & T. Clark, 1898), p. 153.
34. [↑](#ref-ftn54_0) Douglas R. A.
    Hare,*Matthew, Interpretation, a Bible commentary for teaching and preaching*.
    (Louisville: John Knox Press, 1993), p. 20.
35. [↑](#ref-ftn55_0) A.T. Robertson,
    *Word Pictures in the New Testament, Vol.V c1932, Vol.VI c1933 by Sunday School Board of the Southern Baptist Convention*.
    (Oak Harbor: Logos Research Systems, 1997), Mt 3:15.
36. [↑](#ref-ftn56_0) Barclay Moon Newman and Philip C. Stine,
    *A Handbook on the Gospel of Matthew, Originally Published: A Translator's Handbook on the Gospel of Matthew, c1988., UBS helps for translators; UBS handbook series*.
    (New York: United Bible Societies, 1992), p. 73.
37. [↑](#ref-ftn57_0) Hare,
    *Interpretation, a Bible commentary for teaching and preaching.* p.
    21.
38. [↑](#ref-ftn58_0) Barclay, *Daily study Bible series*p. 60.
39. [↑](#ref-ftn59_0) William Hendriksen and Simon J. Kistemaker,
    *vol. 9, New Testament Commentary : Exposition of the Gospel According to Matthew, Accompanying Biblical Text Is Author's Translation., New Testament Commentary.*
    (Grand Rapids: Baker Book House, 1953-2001), p. 213.
40. [↑](#ref-ftn60_0) Craig S. Keener,
    *A commentary on the Gospel of Matthew*. (Grand Rapids, MI: William
    B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1999), p. 132. (See footnote 172 on
    the same page.) It appears that Keener is quoting Blomberg 1992a
    but I was unable to confirm the reference in the electronic
    edition.Blomberg, Craig. Vol. 22,
    *Matthew. electronic ed. Logos Library System; The New American Commentary.*
    (Nashville: Broadman & Holman Publishers, 2001, c1992)
41. [↑](#ref-ftn61_0)
    *The Holy Bible : King James Version., electronic ed. of the 1769 edition of the 1611 Authorized Version.*
    (Bellingham WA: Logos Research Systems, Inc., 1995), Mt 3:16.
42. [↑](#ref-ftn62_0) Compare the introduction to 3:14 above p. 14.
43. [↑](#ref-ftn63_0) Young, *Intermediate New Testament Greek*. p.
    188.
44. [↑](#ref-ftn64_0) Matt. 2:9; 3:16f; 4:11; 7:4; 8:2, 24, 29, 32,
    34; 9:2f, 10, 20; 12:10, 41f; 15:22; 17:3, 5; 19:16; 20:30; 26:51;
    27:51; 28:2, 7, 9, 20
45. [↑](#ref-ftn65_0) Young, *Intermediate New Testament Greek*. p.
    199.
46. [↑](#ref-ftn66_0) See above p. 7.
47. [↑](#ref-ftn67_0) See discussion on Î¿á½—Ï„á½¹Ï‚ at verse 17 p.
    29.
48. [↑](#ref-ftn68_0) Craig S. Keener and InterVarsity Press,
    *The IVP Bible Background Commentary : New Testament.* (Downers
    Grove, Ill.: InterVarsity Press, 1993), Mt 3:16.
49. [↑](#ref-ftn69_0) Marvin Richardson Vincent.
    *Word Studies in the New Testament*. (Bellingham, WA: Logos
    Research Systems, Inc., 2002), Matthew 1:26.
50. [↑](#ref-ftn70_0) Donald A. Hagner.
    *vol. 33A, Word Biblical Commentary : Matthew 1-13, Word Biblical Commentary*.
    (Dallas: Word, Incorporated, 2002), p. 58.
51. [↑](#ref-ftn71_0) See also the prior discussion on ÎºÎ±Î¹Ì€
    Î¹Ì“Î´Î¿Ï…Ì€ p. 24.
52. [↑](#ref-ftn72_0) Young,*Intermediate New Testament Greek.* p.
    68.
53. [↑](#ref-ftn73_0) compare Brooks and Winbery p25
54. [↑](#ref-ftn74_0) See discussion p. 25.
55. [↑](#ref-ftn75_0) David H. Stern. *Complete Jewish Bible*.
    (Clarksville, MD:Jewish New Testament Publications, Inc. 1998),
    Matthew 3:16.
56. [↑](#ref-ftn76_0) *The New Jerusalem Bible.* Edited by Henry
    Wansbrough.*(*New York: Doubleday, 1985)
57. [↑](#ref-ftn77_0) Blomberg, Craig. vol. 22,
    *Matthew, electronic ed., Logos Library System; The New American Commentary.*
    (Nashville: Broadman & Holman Publishers, 2001, c1992), p. 82.
58. [↑](#ref-ftn78_0) Hagner, *WBC*p. 59.
59. [↑](#ref-ftn79_0)
    *Theological Dictionary of the New Testament*, Vols. 5-9 Edited by
    Gerhard Friedrich. Vol. 10 Compiled by Ronald Pitkin., ed. Gerhard
    Kittel, Geoffrey William Bromiley and Gerhard Friedrich, electronic
    ed. (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1964-c1976), 2:740.
60. [↑](#ref-ftn80_0) Robertson, *Grammar* p. 837.
61. [↑](#ref-ftn81_0) Brooks and Winbery p. 102-103
62. [↑](#ref-ftn82_0) See for instance John 3:35; 5:20; 10:17; 15:9
63. [↑](#ref-ftn83_0) Ernest De Witt Burton,
    *Syntax of the Moods and Tenses in New Testament Greek*, 3rd ed.
    (Edinburg: T. & T. Clark, 1898), p. 29.
64. [↑](#ref-ftn84_0) Burton, *Syntax* p. 29.
65. [↑](#ref-ftn85_0) Hagner, *WBC* p. 59.
66. [↑](#ref-ftn86_0) W. D. Davies and Dale C. Allison,
    *A Critical and Exegetical Commentary on the Gospel According to Saint Matthew*.
    (London; New York: T&T Clark International. 2004), p. 340.
67. [↑](#ref-ftn87_0) Keener,
    *A Commentary on the Gospel of Matthew*, p. 131.



## External links

-   [The Baptism of Christ](http://mb-soft.com/believe/txh/bapjesus.htm)
    from the Elwell Evangelical Dictionary
-   [The Baptism of Jesus](http://www.stilltruth.com/webfm_send/1161)
    (PDF) by Thomas Black.
-   [Jesus and His Baptism](http://98.131.162.170//tynbul/library/TynBull_1996_47_2_01_Campbell_JesusBaptism.pdf),
    by R. Alastair Campbell - *Tyndale Bulletin* 47.2 (Nov. 1996)
    191-214



