The oldest of the doctrinal standards of the
[Reformed Churches](Reformed_churches "Reformed churches") is the
Confession of Faith, popularly known as the **Belgic Confession**,
following the seventeenth-century Latin designation "Confessio
Belgica." "Belgica" referred to the whole of the Netherlands, both
north and south, which today is divided into the Netherlands and
Belgium. The confession's chief author was Guido de Bras, a
preacher of the Reformed churches of the Netherlands, who died a
martyr to the faith in the year 1567.

During the sixteenth century the churches in this country were
exposed to the most terrible persecution by the
[Roman Catholic](Roman_Catholicism "Roman Catholicism") government.
To protest against this cruel oppression, and to prove to the
persecutors that the adherents of the Reformed faith were not
rebels, as was laid to their charge, but law-abiding citizens who
professed the true Christian doctrine according to the Holy
Scriptures, de Bräs prepared this confession in the year 1561. In
the following year a copy was sent to King Philip II, together with
an address in which the petitioners declared that they were ready
to obey the government in all lawful things, but that they would
"offer their backs to stripes, their tongues to knives, their
mouths to gags, and their whole bodies to the fire," rather than
deny the truth expressed in this confession. Although the immediate
purpose of securing freedom from persecution was not attained, and
de Bräs himself fell as one of the many thousands who sealed their
faith with their lives, his work has endured. In its composition
the author availed himself to some extent of a confession of the
Reformed churches in France, written chiefly by John Calvin,
published two years earlier.

The work of de Bras, however, is not a mere revision of
[Calvin's](John_Calvin "John Calvin") work, but an independent
composition. In 1566 the text of this confession was revised at a
synod held at Antwerp. In the Netherlands it was at once gladly
received by the churches, and it was adopted by national synods
held during the last three decades of the sixteenth century. The
text, not the contents, was revised again at the
[Synod of Dort](Synod_of_Dort "Synod of Dort") in 1618-19 and
adopted as one of the doctrinal standards to which all
officebearers in the Reformed churches were required to subscribe.
The confession stands as one of the best symbolical statements of
Reformed doctrine. The translation presented here is based on the
French text of 1619.
[[1]](http://www.reformed.org/documents/BelgicConfession.html)

*Go [here](http://www.reformed.org/documents/BelgicConfession.html) for the details of each Article*

## External links

-   [Belgic Confession](http://www.reformed.org/documents/BelgicConfession.html)
    at Reformed.org.
-   [Belgic Confession](http://www.prca.org/bc_index.html) at
    PRCA.org.
-   [Belgic Confession](http://www.carm.org/creeds/belgic.htm) at
    C.A.R.M.
-   [Three Forms of Unity](http://www.rcus.org/index.php/doctrine/standards/172-three-forms)
    at RCUS website.



