*This article is a **[stub](http://www.theopedia.com/Category:Theopedia_stubs "Category:Theopedia stubs")**. Please edit it to add information.*
## Numbers 17

1 Then the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, 2 “Speak to the sons of
Israel, and get from them a rod for each father’s household: twelve
rods, from all their leaders according to their fathers’
households. You shall write each name on his rod, 3 and write
Aaron’s name on the rod of Levi; for there is one rod for the head
of each of their fathers’ households. 4 “You shall then deposit
them in the tent of meeting in front of the testimony, where I meet
with you. 5 “It will come about that the rod of the man whom I
choose will sprout. Thus I will lessen from upon Myself the
grumblings of the sons of Israel, who are grumbling against you.” 6
Moses therefore spoke to the sons of Israel, and all their leaders
gave him a rod apiece, for each leader according to their fathers’
households, twelve rods, with the rod of Aaron among their rods. 7
So Moses deposited the rods before the LORD in the tent of the
testimony.  
8 Now on the next day Moses went into the tent of the testimony;
and behold, the rod of Aaron for the house of Levi had sprouted and
put forth buds and produced blossoms, and it bore ripe almonds. 9
Moses then brought out all the rods from the presence of the LORD
to all the sons of Israel; and they looked, and each man took his
rod. 10 But the LORD said to Moses, “Put back the rod of Aaron
before the testimony to be kept as a sign against the rebels, that
you may put an end to their grumblings against Me, so that they
will not die.” 11 Thus Moses did; just as the LORD had commanded
him, so he did.  
12 Then the sons of Israel spoke to Moses, saying, “Behold, we
perish, we are dying, we are all dying! 13 “Everyone who comes
near, who comes near to the tabernacle of the LORD, must die. Are
we to perish completely?”


