"The **Abstract of Principles** is the first official confession of
Faith which Southern [Baptists](Baptist "Baptist") endorsed. As
Southern Baptist Theological Seminary opened its doors in 1859 in
Greenville, S. C. (later to be moved to its present location in
Louisville, Ky), the principal founder and first President,
[James P. Boyce](James_P._Boyce "James P. Boyce"), was greatly
concerned that the professors of the new school believe and teach
within acceptable boundaries of recognized Southern Baptist
orthodoxy. To insure this (so he thought) Boyce commissioned Basil
Manly, Jr., to draw up an "abstract of doctrinal principles" which
would be included in the official foundation documents of the
seminary.

"The "Fundamental Laws" of the Southern Seminary, which were
written into its charter on April 30, 1858, contain the follow
section: "9. Every Professor of the Institution shall be a member
of a regular Baptist Church; and all persons accepting
Professorships in this Seminary, shall be considered by such
acceptance, as engaging to teach in accordance with, and not
contrary to, the Abstract of Principles hereinafter laid down."
(Mueller, History of Southern Seminary, p. 238). This 20-point
document remains today the doctrinal foundation of Southern
Seminary, and its professors are still required to sign it before
assuming their duties in the classroom."
[[1]](http://www.founders.org/FJ01/abstract.html)

## The Abstract Of Principles

#### I. The Scriptures.

The Scriptures of the Old and New Testament were given by
inspiration of God, and are the only sufficient, certain and
authoritative rule of all saving knowledge, faith and obedience.

#### II. God.

There is but one God, the Maker, Preserver and Ruler of all things,
having in and of himself, all perfections, and being infinite in
them all; and to Him all creatures owe the highest love, reverence
and obedience.

#### III. The Trinity.

God is revealed to us as Father, Son and Holy Spirit each with
distinct personal attributes, but without division of nature,
essence or being.

#### IV. Providence.

God from eternity, decrees or permits all things that come to pass,
and perpetually upholds, directs and governs all creatures and all
events; yet so as not to destroy the free will and responsibility
of intelligent creatures.

#### V. Election.

Election is God's eternal choice of some persons unto everlasting
life -- not because of foreseen merit in them, but of his mere
mercy in Christ -- in consequence of which choice they are called,
justified and glorified.

#### VI. The Fall of Man.

God originally created man in His own image, and free from sin;
but, through the temptation of Satan, he transgressed the command
of God, and fell from his original holiness and righteousness;
whereby his posterity inherit a nature corrupt and wholly opposed
to God and His law, are under condemnation, and as soon as they are
capable of moral action, become actual transgressors.

#### VII. The Mediator.

Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, is the divinely
appointed mediator between God and man. Having taken upon Himself
human nature, yet without sin, He perfectly fulfilled the Law,
suffered and died upon the cross for the salvation of sinners. He
was buried, and rose again the third day, and ascended to His
Father, at whose hand He ever liveth to make intercession for His
people. He is the only Mediator, the Prophet, Priest and King of
the Church, and Sovereign of the Universe.

#### VIII. Regeneration.

Regeneration is a change of heart, wrought by the Holy Spirit, who
quickeneth the dead in trespasses and sins enlightening their minds
spiritually and savingly to understand the Word of God, and
renewing their whole nature, so that they love and practice
holiness. It is a work of God's free and special grace alone.

#### IX. Repentance.

Repentance is an evangelical grace, wherein a person being, by the
Holy Spirit, made sensible of the manifold evil of his sin,
humbleth himself for it, with godly sorrow, detestation of it, and
self-abhorrence, with a purpose and endeavor to walk before God so
as to please Him in all things.

#### X. Faith.

Saving faith is the belief, on God's authority, of whatsoever is
revealed in His Word concerning Christ; accepting and resting upon
Him alone for justification and eternal life. It is wrought in the
heart by the Holy Spirit, and is accompanied by all other saving
graces, and leads to a life of holiness.

#### XI. Justification.

Justification is God's gracious and full acquittal of sinners, who
believe in Christ, from all sin, through the satisfaction that
Christ has made; not for anything wrought in them or done by them;
but on account of the obedience and satisfaction of Christ, they
receiving and resting on Him and His righteousness by faith.

#### XII. Sanctification.

Those who have been regenerated are also sanctified, by God's word
and Spirit dwelling in them. This sanctification is progressive
through the supply of Divine strength, which all saints seek to
obtain, pressing after a heavenly life in cordial obedience to all
Christ's commands.

#### XIII. Perseverance of the Saints.

Those whom God hath accepted in the Beloved, and sanctified by His
Spirit, will never totally nor finally fall away from the state of
grace, but shall certainly persevere to the end; and though they
may fall, through neglect and temptation, into sin, whereby they
grieve the Spirit, impair their graces and comforts, bring reproach
on the Church, and temporal judgments on themselves, yet they shall
be renewed again unto repentance, and be kept by the power of God
through faith unto salvation.

#### XIV. The Church.

The Lord Jesus is the Head of the Church, which is composed of all
his true disciples, and in Him is invested supremely all power for
its government. According to his commandment, Christians are to
associate themselves into particular societies or churches; and to
each of these churches he hath given needful authority for
administering that order, discipline and worship which he hath
appointed. The regular officers of a Church are Bishops, or Elders,
and Deacons.

#### XV. Baptism.

Baptism is an ordinance of the Lord Jesus, obligatory upon every
believer, wherein he is immersed in water in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, as a sign of his
fellowship with the death and resurrection of Christ, of remission
of sins, and of his giving himself up to God, to live and walk in
newness of life. It is prerequisite to church fellowship, and to
participation in the Lord's Supper.

#### XVI. The Lord's Supper.

The Lord's Supper is an ordinance of Jesus Christ, to be
administered with the elements of bread and wine, and to be
observed by his churches till the end of the world. It is in no
sense a sacrifice, but is designed to commemorate his death, to
confirm the faith and other graces of Christians, and to be a bond,
pledge and renewal of their communion with him, and of their church
fellowship.

#### XVII. The Lord's Day.

The Lord's Day is a Christian institution for regular observance,
and should be employed in exercises of worship and spiritual
devotion, both public and private, resting from worldly employments
and amusements, works of necessity and mercy only excepted.

#### XVIII. Liberty of Conscience.

God alone is Lord of the conscience; and He hath left it free from
the doctrines and commandments of men, which are in anything
contrary to His word, or not contained in it. Civil magistrates
being ordained of God, subjection in all lawful thing commanded by
them ought to be yielded by us in the Lord, not only for wrath, but
also for conscience sake.

#### XIX. The Resurrection.

The bodies of men after death return to dust, but their spirits
return immediately to God -- the righteous to rest with Him; the
wicked to be reserved under darkness to the judgment. At the last
day, the bodies of all the dead, both just and unjust, will be
raised.

#### XX. The Judgment.

God hath appointed a day, wherein he will judge the world by Jesus
Christ, when every one shall receive according to his deeds; the
wicked shall go into everlasting punishment; the righteous, into
everlasting life.



