**Amyraldism** (or sometimes **Amyraldianism**), also known as
"hypothetical redemption", "hypothetical universalism" or sometimes
"four-point Calvinism", primarily refers to a modified form of
[Calvinism](Calvinism "Calvinism") which rejects one of the
[Five points of Calvinism](Calvinism "Calvinism"), namely the
doctrine of
[limited atonement](Limited_atonement "Limited atonement") in favor
of an unlimited atonement similar to that of the
[Arminians](Arminianism "Arminianism"). Simply stated, Amyraldism
holds that God has provided Christ's atonement for all alike, but
seeing that none would believe on their own, he then elects those
whom he will bring to faith in Christ, thereby preserving the
Calvinist doctrine of
[unconditional election](Unconditional_election "Unconditional election").^[[1]](#note-0)^

It has also been defined in this manner: "Amyraldianism . . .
implies a twofold will of God, whereby he wills the salvation of
all humankind on condition of faith but wills the salvation of the
elect specifically and unconditionally. The theological difficulty
of God's will having been frustrated by the fact that not all are
saved is met by the argument that God only willed their salvation
on the condition of faith. Where an individual has no faith, then
God has not willed the salvation of that person?"^[[2]](#note-1)^

Named after its formulator
[Moise Amyraut](Moise_Amyraut "Moise Amyraut"), this doctrine is
still viewed as a variety of Calvinism in that it maintains the
particularity of sovereign grace in the application of the
atonement. However, detractors like
[B. B. Warfield](B._B._Warfield "B. B. Warfield") have termed it
"an inconsistent and therefore unstable form of
Calvinism."^[[3]](#note-2)^

[Charles Hodge](Charles_Hodge "Charles Hodge"), in his
*Systematic Theology*, summarized the views of Moise Amyraut in
five propositions:^[[4]](#note-3)^

-   (T)he motive impelling God to redeem men was benevolence, or
    love to men in general.

-   From this motive He sent His Son to make the salvation of all
    men possible.

-   God, in virtue of a decretum universale hypotheticum [i.e., a
    hypothetical universal decree], offers salvation to all men if they
    believe in Christ.

-   All men have a natural ability to repent and believe.

-   But as this natural ability was counteracted by a moral
    inability, God determined to give his efficacious grace to a
    certain number of the human race, and thus to secure their
    salvation.

While Amyraldism is sometimes called **four point Calvinism** due
to its rejection of the doctrine of a limited atonement, the latter
term is often a self-proclaimed epithet for many who are even less
consistent Calvinists than Amyraut. For instance, many so-called
"four point Calvinists" (particularly the
[dispensational](Dispensationalism "Dispensationalism") variety)
not only reject the doctrine of limited atonement but also deny
that regeneration must logically precede faith (a tenet of
Calvinism which Amyraut upheld).



## Contents

-   [1 Historical background](#Historical_background)
    -   [1.1 Amyraldism in 17th century England and Scotland](#Amyraldism_in_17th_century_England_and_Scotland)
    -   [1.2 Amyraldism today](#Amyraldism_today)

-   [2 Notes](#Notes)
-   [3 See also](#See_also)
-   [4 External links](#External_links)

## Historical background

Moses Amyraut, originally a lawyer, but converted to the study of
theology by the reading of Calvin's 'Institutes,' an able divine
and voluminous writer, developed the doctrine of hypothetical or
conditional universalism, for which his teacher,
[John Cameron](index.php?title=John_Cameron&action=edit&redlink=1 "John Cameron (page does not exist)")
(1580-1625), a Scotchman, and for two years Professor at Saumur,
had prepared the way. His object was not to set aside, but to
moderate and liberalize Calvinism by ingrafting this doctrine upon
the particularism of election, and thereby to fortify it against
the objections of
[Roman Catholics](http://www.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roman_Catholic "wikipedia:Roman Catholic"),
by whom the French Protestants were surrounded and threatened.
Being employed by the Reformed Synod in important diplomatic
negotiations with the government, he came in frequent contact with
bishops, and with Cardinal Richelieu, who esteemed him highly. His
system is an approach, not so much to Arminianism, which he
decidedly rejected, as to
[Lutheranism](http://www.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lutheranism "wikipedia:Lutheranism"),
which likewise teaches a universal atonement and a limited
election.

Amyraut maintained the Calvinistic premises of an eternal
[foreordination](Predestination "Predestination") and foreknowledge
of God, whereby he caused all things inevitably to pass—the good
efficiently, the bad permissively. He also admitted the double
decree of
[election](Unconditional_election "Unconditional election") and
[reprobation](Reprobation "Reprobation"). But in addition to this
he taught that God foreordained a universal salvation through the
universal sacrifice of Christ offered to all alike
(*egalement pour tous*), on condition of faith, so that on the part
of God's will and desire (*voluntas, velleitas, affectus*) the
grace is universal, but as regards the condition it is particular,
or only for those who do not reject it and thereby make it
ineffective. The universal redemption scheme precedes the
particular election scheme, and not vice versa. He reasons from the
benevolence of God towards his creatures; Calvinism reasons from
the result, and makes actual facts interpret the decrees. Amyraut
distinguished between objective grace which is offered to all, and
subjective grace in the heart which is given only to the elect. He
also makes a distinction between natural ability and moral ability,
or the power to believe and the willingness to believe; man
possesses the former, but not the latter, in consequence of
inherent depravity. He was disposed, like
[Zwingli](http://www.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zwingli "wikipedia:Zwingli"),
to extend the grace of God beyond the limits of the visible Church,
inasmuch as God by his general providence operates upon the
heathen, and may produce in them a sort of unconscious
Christianity, a faith without knowledge; while within the Church he
operates more fully and clearly through the means of grace. Those
who never heard of Christ are condemned if they reject the general
grace of providence; but the same persons would also reject Christ
if he were offered to them. As regards the result, Amyraut agreed
with the particularists. His ideal universalism is unavailable,
except for those in whom God previously works the condition of
faith, that is, for those who are included in the particular decree
of election.

Amyraut's doctrine created a great commotion in the Reformed
Churches of France, Holland, and Switzerland. Jean Daille
(1594-1670), David Blondel (1591-1655), and others considered it
innocent and consistent with the decrees of the
[Synod of Dort](Synod_of_Dort "Synod of Dort"), where German
Reformed and Anglican delegates professed similar views against the
supralapsarianism of Gomarus. But Peter du Moulin (Molinaeus, since
1621 Professor of the rival theological school of Sedan),
[Friedrich Spanheim](http://www.wikipedia.org/wiki/Friedrich_Spanheim "wikipedia:Friedrich Spanheim")
(1600-1649, Professor in Leiden), Andrew Rivet (1572-1651,
Professor in Leiden), and the theologians of Geneva opposed it as a
departure from the orthodox faith and a compromise between
Calvinism and Arminianism.

The friends of Amyraut urged the love, benevolence, and impartial
justice of God, and the numerous passages in Scripture which teach
that God loves 'the whole world,' that he will have 'all men to be
saved,' that Christ died 'not for our sins only, but also for the
sins of the whole world,' that 'he shut up all in unbelief that he
might have mercy upon all.' On the other hand, it was objected that
God could not really will and intend what is never accomplished;
that he could not purpose an end without providing adequate means;
that, in point of fact, God did not actually offer salvation to
all; and that a universalism based on an impossible condition is an
unfruitful abstraction.

The national Synods at Alençon, 1637; at Charenton, 1645; and at
Loudun, 1659 (the last synod permitted by the French Government),
decided wisely and moderately, saving the orthodoxy of Amyraut, and
guarding only against misconceptions. He gave the assurance that he
did not change the doctrine, but only the method of instruction.
And his opponents were forced at last to admit that the idea of a
universal grace, by which no one was actually saved unless included
in the particular, effective decree of election, was quite
harmless. In this way universalism and particularism were equally
sanctioned, and a schism in the French Church was avoided. The
literary controversy continued for several years longer, and
developed a large amount of learning and ability, until it was
brought to an abrupt close by the political oppressions of the
Reformed Church in France.

*This background section is extracted from Schaff* ^[[5]](#note-4)^


### Amyraldism in 17th century England and Scotland

[John Davenant](http://www.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Davenant "wikipedia:John Davenant")
(1576-1641), like Amyraut a student of John Cameron, was a British
delegate at Dort and influenced some of the members of the
Westminster Assembly. He promoted "hypothetical universalism, a
general atonement in the sense of intention as well as sufficiency,
a common blessing of the cross, and a conditional salvation. The
"root principle of the Davenant School" was the "notion of a
universal desire in God for the salvation of all men."
^[[6]](#note-5)^ In the floor debate on redemption at the
Westminster Assembly, Edmund Calamy of the Davenant School
attempted to insert Amyraldism into the Catechism.^[[7]](#note-6)^

[Richard Baxter](Richard_Baxter "Richard Baxter") (1615-1691) held
to a form of Amyraldism, although he was less Calvinistic than
Amyraut. "He devised an eclectic middle route between Reformed,
Arminian, and Roman doctrines of grace: interpreting the kingdom of
God in terms of contemporary political ideas, he explained Christ's
death as an act of universal redemption (penal and vicarious, but
not substitutionary), in virtue of which God has made a new law
offering pardon and amnesty to the penitent. Repentance and faith,
being obedience to this law, are the believer's personal saving
righteousness. . . The fruit of the seeds which Baxter sowed was
[neonomian](Neonomianism "Neonomianism") Moderatism in Scotland and
moralistic Unitarianism in England."^[[8]](#note-7)^

### Amyraldism today

Popularized in England by the Reformed pastor Richard Baxter,
Amyraldism also gained strong adherence among the
Congregationalists and some Presbyterians in the American colonies,
during the 17th and 18th centuries.

In the United States, essential Amyraldism may be found among
various evangelical groups, perhaps most notably among
[dispensationalists](Dispensationalism "Dispensationalism") in
independent Bible churches and independant Baptist churches --
although the term *Amyraldism* is not used. In England today,
Amyraldism is actively supported by A. C. Clifford, author and
pastor of
[Norwich Reformed Church](http://nrchurch.freezoka.com/nrc.html).
"Five point" Calvinism remains prevalent especially in conservative
groups among the Reformed churches, Reformed Baptists, and other
non-denominational Calvinistic churches; however, the Amyraldian
version of Calvinism seems to have gained permanence as a
recognized (more moderate) version of classic Calvinist theology.

## Notes

1.  [↑](#ref-0) New Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious
    Knowledge, Vol. II. (Baker, 1952) p. 363.
2.  [↑](#ref-1) Andrew McGowan,
    *The Dictionary of Historical Theology* (Eerdmans, 2000), 12. s.v.
    *Amyraldianism*.
3.  [↑](#ref-2) [B. B. Warfield](B._B._Warfield "B. B. Warfield"),
    *The Plan of Salvation* (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1973)
4.  [↑](#ref-3) [Charles Hodge](Charles_Hodge "Charles Hodge"),
    *Systematic Theology* (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, repr. 1993), vol. 2,
    p. 322.
5.  [↑](#ref-4) [Philip Schaff](Philip_Schaff "Philip Schaff")
    (Editor), *Creeds of Christendom* Vol. 1, (Harper & Brothers, 1877)
    p. 483ff. Public Domain.
    [[1]](http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/creeds1.ix.ii.xi.html)
6.  [↑](#ref-5) Herman Hanko, *The History of the Free Offer*
    (Theological School of the Protestant Reformed Churches, 1989),
    82-84. [[2]](http://www.prca.org/pamphlets/Free%20Offer/cover.htm)
7.  [↑](#ref-6) David Blunt, "Debate of Redemption at the
    Westminster Assembly," *British Reformed Journal*, January-March
    1996: 5-10.
8.  [↑](#ref-7) [J. I. Packer](J._I._Packer "J. I. Packer"),
    "Introduction," in Richard Baxter, *The Reformed Pastor* (1656; The
    Banner of Truth Trust, 1979), 9-10.
    [[3]](http://www.banneroftruth.org/pages/articles/article_detail.php?671)

## See also

-   [Limited atonement](Limited_atonement "Limited atonement")

-   [Calvinism](Calvinism "Calvinism")

-   [Propitiation](Propitiation "Propitiation")

## External links

-   [Amyraut and Hypothetical Universalism](http://www.apuritansmind.com/PuritanWorship/Amyraut%20Universalism.htm)
-   [Amyraldianism](http://mb-soft.com/believe/txn/amyraldi.htm)
    from Elwell Evangelical Dictionary
-   [A Critical Examination of the Amyraldian View of the Atonement](http://www.cprf.co.uk/articles/amyraldianexamination.htm)
    by Martyn J. McGeown



