[![Broom icon.png](images/thumb/9/90/Broom_icon.png/30px-Broom_icon.png.pagespeed.ce.3MDzK_R-j-.png)](http://www.theopedia.com/File:Broom_icon.png)
**This article or section may require cleanup to meet Theopedia's *[quality standards](http://www.theopedia.com/Theopedia:Writing_guide "Theopedia:Writing guide")*.**  
Please discuss this issue on the
[talk page](http://www.theopedia.com/index.php?title=Talk:Antichrist&action=edit&redlink=1 "Talk:Antichrist (page does not exist)")
or [replace this tag](index.php?title=Antichrist&action=edit) with
a more specific message. Help:
[How to Contribute](http://www.theopedia.com/Help:How_to_contribute "Help:How to contribute").{{\#if:October
2005|  
This article/section has been tagged since **October 2005**.|}}
Within [eschatology](Eschatology "Eschatology"), the **Antichrist**
has come to mean a person or other entity that is the embodiment of
evil and utterly opposed to truth. The English word Antichrist is
taken from the Greek *antíkhristos*, which literally means "instead
of Christ".

## Contents

-   [1 Appearance of the word in the New Testament](#Appearance_of_the_word_in_the_New_Testament)
-   [2 The expected role of the Antichrist](#The_expected_role_of_the_Antichrist)
-   [3 Characteristics of the Antichrist](#Characteristics_of_the_Antichrist)
-   [4 In popular culture](#In_popular_culture)
-   [5 Characteristics from the Prophet Daniel](#Characteristics_from_the_Prophet_Daniel)
-   [6 Identity of the Antichrist](#Identity_of_the_Antichrist)
-   [7 References](#References)
-   [8 External links](#External_links)

## Appearance of the word in the New Testament

To the surprise of many, the actual word "Antichrist" itself does
not appear once in the
[Book of Revelation](Book_of_Revelation "Book of Revelation") or
the [Book of Daniel](Book_of_Daniel "Book of Daniel") and is never
used at all by [Jesus](Jesus "Jesus") during his ministry including
his discussion about the signs of the "End of the Age" in Matthew
24 and parallels.

The words "Antichrist" and "Antichrists" appear only four times in
the Bible, specifically in the Apostle [John](John "John")'s First
and Second epistles:

-   Who is the liar but he who denies that Jesus is the Christ?
    This is the antichrist, he who denies the Father and the Son. (1
    John 2:22)
-   Children, it is the last hour, and as you have heard that
    antichrist is coming, so now many antichrists have come. Therefore
    we know that it is the last hour. (1 John 2:18)
-   and every spirit that does not confess Jesus is not from God.
    This is the spirit of the antichrist, which you heard was coming
    and now is in the world already. (1 John 4:3)
-   Many deceivers have gone out into the world; they do not
    confess the coming of Jesus Christ in the flesh. This is the
    deceiver and the antichrist (2 John 1:7).

Here it seems to describe any false teacher, false prophet or
corrupter of the Christian faith, but sometimes also seems to
indicate a specific person or a single spirit of deception that
motivates false teaching, and whose presence is a sign of the end
times. Many Christians identify this particular Antichrist with the
man of sin or son of perdition mentioned in 2 Thessalonians 2, and
with several figures in the Book of Revelation including the
Dragon, the Beast, the False Prophet, and the Whore of Babylon. The
Antichrist is variously understood to be a group or organization,
such as a consummately evil system of government or a false
religion; or, more commonly, as an individual, such as an evil
government leader, a religious leader that sets up false worship in
place of the worship of Christ, the incarnation of Satan, a son of
Satan, or a human being under the dominion of Satan.

The understanding of one person being 'the' Antichrist appears to
be combined in 1 John with the idea of a class of persons. There
John speaks of "many antichrists" who typify the "spirit of the
antichrist" that was both present in the first century ("is in the
world already" 1 John 4:3) and continues to exist down to this day.
As John wrote, such an antichrist (opponent of Christ) is anyone
who "denies that Jesus is the Christ," "denies the Father and the
Son," "does not confess Jesus," and does "not confess the coming of
Jesus."

Related ideas and references appear in many other places in the
Bible and various apocrypha, so that a more complete biblical
portrait of the Antichrist has been built up gradually by Christian
theologians and folk-religionists. Matthew 24 warns of "false
Christs" in several places, and of deceivers who would appear
claiming falsely to be the returned Christ. (Matt. 24:5, 24)

In the "small apocalypse" of [Paul](Paul "Paul"), in 2
Thessalonians 2:1–12, a "man of sin", "the son of perdition" is
expected to set himself up in the temple of God, on the false
pretense that he is God himself. This portrait of the Antichrist is
reminiscent of the acts of Antiochus Epiphanes, who around 170 BC
commanded Jews to sacrifice pigs on the altar, four times a year on
the Shabbat, in tribute to him as the supreme god of the Seleucids.
Paul appears to be warning his readers by this allusion to events
in the past, to anticipate similar trouble in the future. Some
Christians believe that the events warned of in this passage have
already taken place soon after Paul warned of them. Many others
believe that the Antichrist has yet to appear.

## The expected role of the Antichrist

Christian denominations disagree on what will happen in the end
times, and the role that Satan and the Antichrist will play. Among
those who understand that the Antichrists of whom John was writing
are instead a single individual and expect this one to arise in the
future, there is a general consensus that sometime prior to the
expected return of Jesus, there will be a period of "trials and
tribulations" during which the Antichrist, inspired by Satan, will
attempt to win supporters, and will silence anyone or make enemies
of any country that refuses to approve of him. This metaphor is
written as "receive his mark".

In this view, an event popularly termed the "White Throne Judgment"
will take place, at which time both the living and the dead will be
resurrected, some for everlasting life, and some for everlasting
death. All those who worship God and Jesus will be admitted to the
presence of God; but everyone who would not repent of the
Antichrist will be sent to an outer darkness. Finally, the "Dragon"
(often interpreted as Satan), the "Beast" (often interpreted as the
Antichrist) and the "false prophet" (interpreted in many ways) who
compels the world to worship the Beast (lie), and all who received
his mark (cast their lot with him), will be thrown into a lake of
fire together with death and Hell. These views are based on
controversial passages in the Apocalypse of John, more commonly
known as the Book of Revelation.

In other views, the role is far less dramatic - the Antichrist is
simply understood to be a group of individuals as well as
organizations, who, for their history of trying to deceive and
stifle the faithful, are finally destroyed for all time by God on
the day of Armageddon.

## Characteristics of the Antichrist

Based on the interpretations of the specific passages from the
books of Daniel and Revelation, the Antichrist is commonly expected
to meet certain characteristics. The Bible describes a beast-like
creature, but over the years these characteristics have been
interpreted as being metaphorical, or symbolic as the book itself
indicates, since in Daniel 8:3 we are told of a ram like beast, and
then Daniel 8:20 explains that "the ram which thou sawest having
two horns are the kings of Media and Persia." Also in Daniel 8:5 we
are told of a goat like beast with a "notable horn" and in Dan 8:21
we are told "the rough goat is the king of Grecia: and the great
horn that is between his eyes is the first king." So a beast
represents a kingdom and the horns or heads represent some aspect
of its political leadership. So the antichrist is a religious
kingdom and its heads represent its political leadership which
Revelation 17:10 tells us that the seven heads "...are seven kings:
five are fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet come; and
when he cometh, he must continue a short space."

For example, the beast is supposed to have "ten horns and seven
heads, with ten crowns upon its horns" (Revelation 13:1–2) which is
sometimes interpreted to mean the Antichrist will lead 27 or 17
countries. They will follow in his battles that he will declare
boldly and without humility are for a purpose which is untrue.
Likewise the fact that the beast is described as being "worshipped"
is taken as a sign that the Antichrist will be a popular figure
among those who are deceived by him. According to the book of
Revelation the Antichrist can be identified by the number of the
Beast.

The most common interpretations continue to be that the Antichrist
will be some sort of high-ranking political leader, who will
initially do very good, popular things, which will win him many
followers. In the end, however he is supposed to get increasingly
totalitarian and elicit more and more sacrifices from his followers
until eventually his evil ways become known, and the era of "trials
and tribulations" begins.

## In popular culture

The Antichrist is a central figure in many popular movies with
occult themes, such as Rosemary's Baby, and The Omen series. The
Devil's Advocate has Al Pacino as Satan attempt to lure Keanu
Reeves' character into joining him and fathering the Antichrist. In
The Seventh Sign, the idea of the Antichrist is tangentially
referred to as a child conceived without a soul, whose birth will
signal the end of all life. The Seventh Seal uses the spectre of
death to refer obliquely to the prophesies of the End Times and the
role of the Antichrist as the Grim Reaper. The Antichrist is a
central figure in the Left Behind series of books and movies; in
this series the Antichrist figure is a European politician named
Nicolae Carpathia. There is also an Antichrist-like character
called Randall Flagg in several of Stephen King's writings, most
notably in "Eyes of the Dragon", The Stand, and The Dark Tower
series (the latter of which has him serving the Crimson King, a
being who may be King's variation of the Beast). In Terry Pratchett
and Neil Gaiman's comedy novel, Good Omens, Sister Mary Loquatious
of the Chattering Order of Saint Beryl misplaces the Antichrist. In
an interesting twist on the genre, Cain becomes a false messiah and
potential Antichrist in the form of Kane a.k.a Jacob Caine in the
Command & Conquer series. The satirical comedy series South Park
has used the idea of the antichrist.

## Characteristics from the Prophet Daniel

He is a stern-faced king, a master of intrigue. He will cause
astounding devastation, succeed in whatever he does, destroy the
mighty men and the holy people, cause deceit to prosper, consider
himself superior, take his stand against Christ, corrupt with
flattery, do as he pleases, exalt and magnify himself above God,
say unheard of things against God, show no regard for Christ, honor
a god of fortresses, attack the mightiest fortresses, greatly honor
those who acknowledge him.

## Identity of the Antichrist

Many point to Biblical prophecies to identify the area from where
the Antichrist will
come.[[1]](http://www.lastdaysmystery.info/from_where_the_antichrist_comes.htm)
The Old Testament prophets of Isaiah, Ezekiel, Daniel and Micah
associate this [End times](End_times "End times") world leader with
the territory of the Assyrian and Babylonian Empires, in the region
including present day Turkey, Syria, Iraq, Iran, Lebanon, Jordan,
and Saudi Arabia. The apsotle John in
[Revelation](Revelation "Revelation") also provided similar clues
to indicate that the Antichrist would arise to power from the
Middle East.

Despite this evidence, many people, or even nations or movements,
have been thought by some to be the Antichrist.

Paul of Tarsus has been theorized by some (among them Thomas
Jefferson, Albert Schweitzer, George Bernard Shaw, Carl Sagan and
Carl Jung) to have fulfilled the role of the Antichrist within the
chronicles of the New Testament of the Bible itself. This theory is
premised on an idea that the original teachings of Christ, such as
nonviolence, nonresistance and vegetarianism, were subverted by
Paul.

The Roman emperor beginning with Nero, sometimes together with the
four emperors who succeeded him in the year following his suicide,
until the elevation of Nero's general Vespasian to emperor, have
been interpreted from very early times, either alone or
collectively as the Beast of the Apocalypse.

In this tumultuous period, superstitious fear and mob violence grew
against Christians, and the Roman wars against the Jews intensified
(AD 66–70), ending with the destruction of the Temple in AD 70
under the command of general Titus (later emperor), and the
maniacal slaughter of the Jews who were living at Jerusalem.
According to tradition, Nero ordered the crucifixion of St. Peter
and the beheading of Saint Paul. Both Jewish and Christian
literature survives, referring to Emperor Nero as the Antichrist. A
more detailed description of this interpretation can be found in
the entry on the Book of Revelation.

After the reforms of Patriarch Nikon to the Russian Orthodox Church
of 1652 a large number of Old Believers held that czar Peter the
Great was the Antichrist, because of his treatment of the Orthodox
Church, namely separating church from state, requiring clergyman to
conform to the standards of all Russian civilians (shaved beards,
being fluent in French), and requiring them to pay state taxes. In
1916 (?), a woman believing the faith healer Rasputin was the
Antichrist, for his supposedly evil influences over the czar and
czarina, stabbed him, cutting a large wound in his chest. He fully
recovered.

Another idea that began appearing early in the history of the
Christian church, is the opinion that the Antichrist will be an
apostate priest or Christian secular ruler, perhaps a Pope or other
high leader of the Christian church, or a pretender to the Papacy.
Some Christian sects have made it an issue of faith to identify the
Bishop of Rome and the papal system as the Antichrist, which was
included in e.g. the Westminster Confession. Virtually all popes
have been called the Antichrist by their enemies, and many popes
have applied this title of "Antichrist", "son of perdition", or
"man of sin", to their enemies as well.

St. Bellarmine gives in full the theory set forth by the Greek and
Latin Fathers, of a personal Antichrist to come just before the end
of the world and to be accepted by the Jews and enthroned in the
temple at Jerusalem—thus endeavoring to dispose of the Protestant
exposition which saw Antichrist in the pope. Bellarmine's
interpretation, in modified form, is now accepted by most
premillennial dispensationalists.

Some Christians claimed the Antichrist was Muhammad, founder of
Islam, because they consider him a false prophet who placed himself
above Jesus, and whose religion conquered Jerusalem and forcibly
converted Christians, Jews, and others.

Identifying the Antichrist has returned as a task in the Internet
age, and has created a body of literature in its own right.

Since the Bible indicates that the anitchrist beast may be
identified by a number, "the number of the beast" which "is the
number of a man" (Revelation 13:18). Various numerological methods
of calculating the number of the name of the Beast ("666" in most
manuscript sources, "616" in a minority), and other methods are
used to identify the Antichrist before he has the chance to lead
astray. The oldest historical example is in Latin where each letter
has an equivalent numerical value. Also "VV IL DVCE" ("Long Live Il
Duce", a phrase chanted for Mussolini).

In English, another nice example is the case of Adolf Hitler, where
numbering the letters A=100, B=101, etc, produces H+I+T+L+E+R=666.
Another numerological candidate is Henry Kissinger. Example A=6,
B=12, C=18, etc, produces K+I+S+S+I+N+G+E+R=666.

In "ASCII", (American Standard Code for Information Interchange),
Bill Gates' name is also identified with the number of the beast.
Each letter in the ASCII alphabet also represents a number, and
coincidentally, if you add up the letters in his real name (Bill
Gates the III, or in this case, Bill Gates III), the total is 666.

Candidates for the Antichrist have been men in virtually all
positions of public influence, the most frequent modern candidates:
Charles Prince of Wales[1], Napoleon Bonaparte, Sam Walton, Bill
Gates, Adolf Hitler, Joseph Stalin, John Lennon, Nelson Mandela,
various Popes or the Roman Catholic Church, the World Council of
Churches, the European Union and recent Presidents of the United
States. Some have taken Since the September 11, 2001 Terrorist
Attack, theories about Osama bin Laden, Saddam Hussein, or George
W. Bush being the Antichrist have been put forward. In addition,
apocalyptic Christians such as Herb Peters and Constance E. Cumbey
point to Javier Solana.

Claims about world leaders echo the plot of the Left Behind series
of novels (by Tim LaHaye and Jerry B. Jenkins) that the Antichrist
may be the Secretary-General of the United Nations. LaHaye and
Thomas Ice publish a newsletter that speculates about these
matters, and they have also suggested that the rise of militant
Islam in the 21st Century is a possible sign of the End Times, as
being the false religion of the Antichrist and his partner, the
False Prophet.

In addition certain occultists and Satanists have proclaimed
themselves to be the Antichrist, including Aleister Crowley and
John Whiteside Parsons.

## References

-   Boyer, Paul. 1992. When Time Shall Be No More: Prophecy Belief
    in Modern American Culture. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap/Harvard
    University Press.
    [ISBN 067495128X](http://www.theopedia.com/Special:BookSources/067495128X)
-   Fuller, Robert C. 1995.
    *Naming the Antichrist: The History of an American Obsession*. New
    York: Oxford University Press.
    [ISBN 0195082443](http://www.theopedia.com/Special:BookSources/0195082443)
-   McGinn, Bernard. 1994.
    *Antichrist: 200 Years of the Human Fascination with Evil*. New
    York: Columbia University Press.
    [ISBN 0-231-11977-1](http://www.theopedia.com/Special:BookSources/0231119771)

## External links

-   [Quotes](http://www.historicist.com/articles2/delusion.htm)
    concerning the Antichrist from those in
    [Church history](Church_history "Church history")
-   [About Antichrist](http://www.lastdaysmystery.info/the_antichrist.htm)



