The **Ark of the Covenant** (Hebrew: 'ărōn ha-berīth) in the
[Old Testament](Old_Testament "Old Testament") of the
[Bible](Bible "Bible") is the chest the Hebrews used to contain the
tablets of the Law given by God to [Moses](Moses "Moses"). The Ark
was the centerpiece of the Temple in Jerusalem, residing in the
Holy of Holies, and seen just once a year by the high priest on Yom
Kippur, the Day of Atonement.

## Contents

-   [1 Biblical description](#Biblical_description)
-   [2 History](#History)
-   [3 Current status](#Current_status)
    -   [3.1 Jeremiah](#Jeremiah)
        -   [3.1.1 Ron Wyatt](#Ron_Wyatt)

    -   [3.2 Ethiopia](#Ethiopia)
        -   [3.2.1 Menelik I](#Menelik_I)

    -   [3.3 Tanis](#Tanis)

-   [4 References](#References)

## Biblical description

The Ark is first mentioned in Exodus 25. Essentially, the Ark was a
box approximately 27 inches wide by 27 inches high by 36 inches
long (Biblical: 1.5 x 1.5 x 2 cubits; a cubit = 18 inches); the
"shittim wood" was determined to have been
[acacia](index.php?title=Acacia&action=edit&redlink=1 "Acacia (page does not exist)").
The lid of the box was solid gold and crowned by a pair of gold
cherubim facing each other; the outspread wings of the cherubim
formed the throne of God, while the Ark itself was His footstool.

The "staves" were gold rings on the corners, which enabled poles to
be inserted when the Ark was carried by the Levites, who were the
only Hebrew tribe authorized to do so. When traveling, the Ark was
covered by a costly veil of blue cloth.

The Ark was also known by another name: '*Ark of Testimony*, the
result of its containing the most important object in Hebrew life,
the tablets of the Law (Exodus 40:18; Deuteronomy 10:5) given to
Moses on Mt. Sinai, which were often referred to as the testimony.
The tablets, as well as a pot of manna (Exodus 16:34), and Aaron's
rod which had blossomed (Numbers 17:10) formed the contents of the
Ark. Jewish tradition mentions that the first five books of the
Torah written by Moses was also placed inside; however, according
to 1 Kings 8:9, when the Ark was placed in the new temple by
Solomon, it contained only the tablets of the Law.

## History

When the Ark was carried in the open, it was covered by a veil of
badger skins, and a blue cloth, concealed even from the Levite
priests who were assigned to carry it. When the Hebrews were at
rest during the wanderings, the Ark was placed within the
tabernacle, a tent-like structure erected as a place of worship,
the Ark being placed within a segregated area inside called the
“Holy of Holies”.

During the journeys of the Israelites the ark was carried by the
priests in advance of the main body of the Hebrew host (Numbers
4:5, 4:6; 10:33-36; Psams 68:1; 132:8), its power first being
demonstrated when it was borne over the Jordan River, which
separated into a pathway for the priests to cross (Joshua 3:15,
3:16; 4:7, 4:10, 4:11, 4:17, 4:18). It was borne in the procession
round Jericho (Joshua 6:4, 6:6, 6:8, 6:11, 6:12) for seven days
prior to the successful capture of that city.

Much has been said about the Ark’s power, that it was claimed to
have been an early type of storage battery; indeed, warnings not to
touch the Ark by anyone but the high priest were in force, and one
man (Uzzah) was killed by it after reaching out to steady it. Taken
in battle at one point in its history (1 Samuel 4:3-11), the
victorious Philistines were forced to beg their defeated foe to
take it back after spending seven calamitous months with it (1
Samuel 5:7, 1 Samuel 5:8).

After the settlement of Israel in the Promised Land the ark
remained in the tabernacle at Gilgal for a season, and then removed
to Shiloh until the time of Eli, between 300 and 400 years
(Jeremiah 7:12). It remained then at Kirjath-jearim (1 Samuel 7:1,
1 Samuel 7:2) for twenty years until removed to the house of
Obed-edom in Gath-rimmon for three months (2 Samuel 6:1-11) as a
result of Uzzah’s transgression; when that period ended David
removed it in a grand procession to Jerusalem, where it was kept
till a place was prepared for it (2 Samuel 6:12-19). It was left to
Solomon to build the first temple where it was deposited (1 Kings
8:6-9). When the Babylonians destroyed Jerusalem and plundered the
temple, the ark was probably taken away by Nebuchadnezzar and
destroyed, as no trace of it is afterwards to be found. Jeremiah in
the passage Jeremiah 3:16, which certainly was written after the
destruction of Jerusalem by the Babylonians, states that in the
future new Jerusalem nobody will any more concern himself about the
Ark of the Covenant, and no one will again build such a one. In the
post-exilic Psalm 132:8 the Lord is petitioned to occupy together
with the ark, the symbol of His omnipotent presence, also the
sanctuary that has been erected for Him, the poet describing
himself and those who sing this psalm as participants in the
home-bringing of the ark by David. No further mention is made of
the Ark of the Covenant in the Psalter or the prophetical books.
The absence of the Ark from the second temple was considered a
reason for its inferiority

## Current status

The Ark of the Covenant is the most sought-after religious object
in history, involving the divinely-inspired, soul-seekers, the
Knights Templars, archeaologists, historians, scholars, skeptics,
and outright charlatans.

### Jeremiah

Several traditions exist as to the fate of the Ark after 587 B.C.
The first was written down in the book of 2nd Maccabees, apparently
a copy of a letter written by the prophet Jeremiah:

*The prophet, being warned by God, commanded that the tabernacle and the ark should accompany him, till he came forth to the mountain where Moses went up and saw the inheritance of God. And when Jeremias came thither he found a hollow cave and he carried in thither the tabernacle and the ark and the altar of incense, and so stopped the door. Then some of them that followed him, came up to mark the place; but they could not find it. And when Jeremias perceived it, he blamed them saying: the place shall be unknown, till God gather together the congregation of the people and receive them to mercy. And then the Lord will shew these things, and the majesty of the Lord shall appear, and there shall be a cloud as it was also shewed to Moses, and he shewed it when Solomon prayed that the place might be sanctified to the great God. (2 Maccabees 2:4-8)*
According to tradition, Jeremiah was divinely warned of the
Babylonian invasion, and taking the Ark he had it sealed up and
hidden inside a mountain where no one could find it except during
the last days; various accounts cite the location as being either
Mt. Nebo in Jordan, or near the Temple Mount in a small grotto
within Mt. Moriah. This in turn has led to several searches by
professional and amateur alike, of which the most notable of the
latter was Ron Wyatt.

#### Ron Wyatt

The Temple Mount location has been the subject of several searches
by Ron Wyatt, a registered nurse by training, and a Biblical
archaeologist/historian in practice. Wyatt claimed to have found
the Ark in 1982 [[1]](http://www.wyattarchaeology.com/ark.htm)
after being divinely inspired; his search resulted in several
images of gold which he claimed was the Ark, albeit blurry.

Wyatt had also found, among other things, the tombs of Noah,
Abraham, Jesus, and numerous other Biblical figures; the sites of
Sodom, Gomorrah, and the true Noah's ark; Moses' original Ten
Commandments bound with a golden hinge; the true site of the Red
Sea crossing; and many other things related to the Bible, all when
he was on his vacations, which he could afford while working
part-time [[2]](http://www.tccsa.tc/articles/wyatt.html). His
"achievements" led to severe criticism, most notably from Christian
circles, his lack of formal training in archaeology
notwithstanding. Needless to say, when comparred with the physical
description given in the Bible about the Ark of the Covenant,
Wyatt's claimed photos do not match.

Dr. Jim Fleming, founder and former director of the Jerusalem
Center for Biblical Studies (located at Tantur) and an editorial
advisor to *Biblical Archaeology Review* stated that while at a dig
at Mount Calvary he observed at close hand Wyatt's methods,
claiming in one incident that he had discovered the Ark based on
nothing more than the reading of an ordinary metal detector. Others
have noted similar instances; John Woods, a Christian pastor, said
“I saw him explaining to a group that a piece of metal embedded in
the face of the Garden Tomb was part of the seal Pilate had placed
upon the tomb. In fact it was a piece of shrapnel from the war (the
Six-Day War of 1967; from a letter to Gordon Franz from Reverend
John Woods, Executive Director, The Gospel Mission of Washington,
D.C., February 4, 1994).

### Ethiopia

According to another tradition, the Ark may have been removed by
the Levites to keep it out of the hands of the idolatrous Israelite
King Manasseh, who profaned the Temple by sacrificing to a pagan
god (2 Kings 21). The tradition holds that the priests took the Ark
with them east towards the Nile, where they erected an actual
temple on the island of Elephantine (evidence confirms the
existence of such a structure). Later on the Ark was again moved
south to Ethiopia, where it resided on an island in Lake Tana for
several centuries before being moved once more to Aksum, where it
resides in a small chapel today.

#### Menelik I

A variant of this story was that the son of a union between the
legendary Queen of Sheba and King Solomon had returned to Jerusalem
as a young man. Menelik would stay for a short time, and either be
given the Ark by his father or would steal it.

### Tanis

Tanis was an Egyptian city in the Nile delta region, and once the
capitol of Pharaoh Shoshenq I, claimed to have been the Biblical
[Shishak](index.php?title=Shishak&action=edit&redlink=1 "Shishak (page does not exist)")
who raided Jerusalem and carried away much treasure. Belief in this
theory has never been popular due to lack of supporting evidence;
however, Tanis was intriguing enough to serve as a fictional
location for one of today's most famous films: 1981's
*Raiders of the Lost Ark*. Indiana Jones, the hero of the film, is
an archaeologist sent by the U.S. government to retrieve the Ark
from its Tanis location before the Nazis can get to it.

## References

-   ["Noah's Ark, the Ark of the Covenant, and Ron Wyatt," article by Linda Gunderson](http://www.tccsa.tc/articles/wyatt.html)



