The **Articles of Religion** are an official doctrinal statement of
American [Methodism](Methodism "Methodism"). Adapted by
[John Wesley](John_Wesley "John Wesley") from the Anglican
[Articles](Articles_of_Religion_(Anglican) "Articles of Religion (Anglican)"),
they are found in paragraph 103 of
*The United Methodist Book of Discipline* and have remained
relatively unchanged since 1808 (except for a few additional
articles added in later years).

## Contents

-   [1 Text of the creed](#Text_of_the_creed)
    -   [1.1 Article I—Of Faith in the Holy Trinity](#Article_I.E2.80.94Of_Faith_in_the_Holy_Trinity)
    -   [1.2 Article II—Of the Word, or Son of God, Who Was Made Very Man](#Article_II.E2.80.94Of_the_Word.2C_or_Son_of_God.2C_Who_Was_Made_Very_Man)
    -   [1.3 Article III—Of the Resurrection of Christ](#Article_III.E2.80.94Of_the_Resurrection_of_Christ)
    -   [1.4 Article IV—Of the Holy Ghost](#Article_IV.E2.80.94Of_the_Holy_Ghost)
    -   [1.5 Article V—Of the Sufficiency of the Holy Scriptures for Salvation](#Article_V.E2.80.94Of_the_Sufficiency_of_the_Holy_Scriptures_for_Salvation)
    -   [1.6 Article VI—Of the Old Testament](#Article_VI.E2.80.94Of_the_Old_Testament)
    -   [1.7 Article VII—Of Original or Birth Sin](#Article_VII.E2.80.94Of_Original_or_Birth_Sin)
    -   [1.8 Article VIII—Of Free Will](#Article_VIII.E2.80.94Of_Free_Will)
    -   [1.9 Article IX—Of the Justification of Man](#Article_IX.E2.80.94Of_the_Justification_of_Man)
    -   [1.10 Article X—Of Good Works](#Article_X.E2.80.94Of_Good_Works)
    -   [1.11 Article XI—Of Works of Supererogation](#Article_XI.E2.80.94Of_Works_of_Supererogation)
    -   [1.12 Article XII—Of Sin After Justification](#Article_XII.E2.80.94Of_Sin_After_Justification)
    -   [1.13 Article XIII—Of the Church](#Article_XIII.E2.80.94Of_the_Church)
    -   [1.14 Article XIV—Of Purgatory](#Article_XIV.E2.80.94Of_Purgatory)
    -   [1.15 Article XV—Of Speaking in the Congregation in Such a Tongue as the People Understand](#Article_XV.E2.80.94Of_Speaking_in_the_Congregation_in_Such_a_Tongue_as_the_People_Understand)
    -   [1.16 Article XVI—Of the Sacraments](#Article_XVI.E2.80.94Of_the_Sacraments)
    -   [1.17 Article XVII—Of Baptism](#Article_XVII.E2.80.94Of_Baptism)
    -   [1.18 Article XVIII—Of the Lord's Supper](#Article_XVIII.E2.80.94Of_the_Lord.27s_Supper)
    -   [1.19 Article XIX—Of Both Kinds](#Article_XIX.E2.80.94Of_Both_Kinds)
    -   [1.20 Article XX—Of the One Oblation of Christ, Finished upon the Cross](#Article_XX.E2.80.94Of_the_One_Oblation_of_Christ.2C_Finished_upon_the_Cross)
    -   [1.21 Article XXI—Of the Marriage of Ministers](#Article_XXI.E2.80.94Of_the_Marriage_of_Ministers)
    -   [1.22 Article XXII—Of the Rites and Ceremonies of Churches](#Article_XXII.E2.80.94Of_the_Rites_and_Ceremonies_of_Churches)
    -   [1.23 Article XXIII—Of the Rulers of the United States of America](#Article_XXIII.E2.80.94Of_the_Rulers_of_the_United_States_of_America)
    -   [1.24 Article XXIV—Of Christian Men's Goods](#Article_XXIV.E2.80.94Of_Christian_Men.27s_Goods)
    -   [1.25 Article XXV—Of a Christian Man's Oath](#Article_XXV.E2.80.94Of_a_Christian_Man.27s_Oath)
    -   [1.26 Of Sanctification](#Of_Sanctification)
    -   [1.27 Of the Duty of Christians to the Civil Authority](#Of_the_Duty_of_Christians_to_the_Civil_Authority)


## Text of the creed

### Article I—Of Faith in the Holy Trinity

There is but one living and true God, everlasting, without body or
parts, of infinite power, wisdom, and goodness; the maker and
preserver of all things, both visible and invisible. And in unity
of this Godhead there are three persons, of one substance, power,
and eternity—the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

### Article II—Of the Word, or Son of God, Who Was Made Very Man

The Son, who is the Word of the Father, the very and eternal God,
of one substance with the Father, took man's nature in the womb of
the blessed Virgin; so that two whole and perfect natures, that is
to say, the Godhead and Manhood, were joined together in one
person, never to be divided; whereof is one Christ, very God and
very Man, who truly suffered, was crucified, dead, and buried, to
reconcile his Father to us, and to be a sacrifice, not only for
original guilt, but also for actual sins of men.

### Article III—Of the Resurrection of Christ

Christ did truly rise again from the dead, and took again his body,
with all things appertaining to the perfection of man's nature,
wherewith he ascended into heaven, and there sitteth until he
return to judge all men at the last day.

### Article IV—Of the Holy Ghost

The Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son, is of one
substance, majesty, and glory with the Father and the Son, very and
eternal God.

### Article V—Of the Sufficiency of the Holy Scriptures for Salvation

The Holy Scripture containeth all things necessary to salvation; so
that whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is
not to be required of any man that it should be believed as an
article of faith, or be thought requisite or necessary to
salvation. In the name of the Holy Scripture we do understand those
canonical books of the Old and New Testament of whose authority was
never any doubt in the church. The names of the canonical books
are:

Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, Joshua, Judges,
Ruth, The First Book of Samuel, The Second Book of Samuel, The
First Book of Kings, The Second Book of Kings, The First Book of
Chronicles, The Second Book of Chronicles, The Book of Ezra, The
Book of Nehemiah, The Book of Esther, The Book of Job, The Psalms,
The Proverbs, Ecclesiastes or the Preacher, Cantica or Songs of
Solomon, Four Prophets the Greater, Twelve Prophets the Less.

All the books of the New Testament, as they are commonly received,
we do receive and account canonical.

### Article VI—Of the Old Testament

The Old Testament is not contrary to the New; for both in the Old
and New Testament everlasting life is offered to mankind by Christ,
who is the only Mediator between God and man, being both God and
Man. Wherefore they are not to be heard who feign that the old
fathers did look only for transitory promises. Although the law
given from God by Moses as touching ceremonies and rites doth not
bind Christians, nor ought the civil precepts thereof of necessity
be received in any commonwealth; yet notwithstanding, no Christian
whatsoever is free from the obedience of the commandments which are
called moral.

### Article VII—Of Original or Birth Sin

Original sin standeth not in the following of Adam (as the
Pelagians do vainly talk), but it is the corruption of the nature
of every man, that naturally is engendered of the offspring of
Adam, whereby man is very far gone from original righteousness, and
of his own nature inclined to evil, and that continually.

### Article VIII—Of Free Will

The condition of man after the fall of Adam is such that he cannot
turn and prepare himself, by his own natural strength and works, to
faith, and calling upon God; wherefore we have no power to do good
works, pleasant and acceptable to God, without the grace of God by
Christ preventing us, that we may have a good will, and working
with us, when we have that good will.

### Article IX—Of the Justification of Man

We are accounted righteous before God only for the merit of our
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, by faith, and not for our own works
or deservings. Wherefore, that we are justified by faith, only, is
a most wholesome doctrine, and very full of comfort.

### Article X—Of Good Works

Although good works, which are the fruits of faith, and follow
after justification, cannot put away our sins, and endure the
severity of God's judgment; yet are they pleasing and acceptable to
God in Christ, and spring out of a true and lively faith, insomuch
that by them a lively faith may be as evidently known as a tree is
discerned by its fruit.

### Article XI—Of Works of Supererogation

Voluntary works—besides, over and above God's commandments—which
they call works of supererogation, cannot be taught without
arrogancy and impiety. For by them men do declare that they do not
only render unto God as much as they are bound to do, but that they
do more for his sake than of bounden duty is required; whereas
Christ saith plainly: When you have done all that is commanded you,
say, We are unprofitable servants.

### Article XII—Of Sin After Justification

Not every sin willingly committed after justification is the sin
against the Holy Ghost, and unpardonable. Wherefore, the grant of
repentance is not to be denied to such as fall into sin after
justification. After we have received the Holy Ghost, we may depart
from grace given, and fall into sin, and, by the grace of God, rise
again and amend our lives. And therefore they are to be condemned
who say they can no more sin as long as they live here; or deny the
place of forgiveness to such as truly repent.

### Article XIII—Of the Church

The visible church of Christ is a congregation of faithful men in
which the pure Word of God is preached, and the Sacraments duly
administered according to Christ's ordinance, in all those things
that of necessity are requisite to the same.

### Article XIV—Of Purgatory

The Romish doctrine concerning purgatory, pardon, worshiping, and
adoration, as well of images as of relics, and also invocation of
saints, is a fond thing, vainly invented, and grounded upon no
warrant of Scripture, but repugnant to the Word of God.

### Article XV—Of Speaking in the Congregation in Such a Tongue as the People Understand

It is a thing plainly repugnant to the Word of God, and the custom
of the primitive church, to have public prayer in the church, or to
minister the Sacraments, in a tongue not understood by the people.

### Article XVI—Of the Sacraments

Sacraments ordained of Christ are not only badges or tokens of
Christian men's profession, but rather they are certain signs of
grace, and God's good will toward us, by which he doth work
invisibly in us, and doth not only quicken, but also strengthen and
confirm, our faith in him.

There are two Sacraments ordained of Christ our Lord in the Gospel;
that is to say, Baptism and the Supper of the Lord.

Those five commonly called sacraments, that is to say,
confirmation, penance, orders, matrimony, and extreme unction, are
not to be counted for Sacraments of the Gospel; being such as have
partly grown out of the corrupt following of the apostles, and
partly are states of life allowed in the Scriptures, but yet have
not the like nature of Baptism and the Lord's Supper, because they
have not any visible sign or ceremony ordained of God.

The Sacraments were not ordained of Christ to be gazed upon, or to
be carried about; but that we should duly use them. And in such
only as worthily receive the same, they have a wholesome effect or
operation; but they that receive them unworthily, purchase to
themselves condemnation, as St. Paul saith.

### Article XVII—Of Baptism

Baptism is not only a sign of profession and mark of difference
whereby Christians are distinguished from others that are not
baptized; but it is also a sign of regeneration or the new birth.
The Baptism of young children is to be retained in the Church.

### Article XVIII—Of the Lord's Supper

The Supper of the Lord is not only a sign of the love that
Christians ought to have among themselves one to another, but
rather is a sacrament of our redemption by Christ's death; insomuch
that, to such as rightly, worthily, and with faith receive the
same, the bread which we break is a partaking of the body of
Christ; and likewise the cup of blessing is a partaking of the
blood of Christ.

Transubstantiation, or the change of the substance of bread and
wine in the Supper of our Lord, cannot be proved by Holy Writ, but
is repugnant to the plain words of Scripture, overthroweth the
nature of a sacrament, and hath given occasion to many
superstitions.

The body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the Supper, only
after a heavenly and spiritual manner. And the mean whereby the
body of Christ is received and eaten in the Supper is faith.

The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was not by Christ's ordinance
reserved, carried about, lifted up, or worshiped.

### Article XIX—Of Both Kinds

The cup of the Lord is not to be denied to the lay people; for both
the parts of the Lord's Supper, by Christ's ordinance and
commandment, ought to be administered to all Christians alike.

### Article XX—Of the One Oblation of Christ, Finished upon the Cross

The offering of Christ, once made, is that perfect redemption,
propitiation, and satisfaction for all the sins of the whole world,
both original and actual; and there is none other satisfaction for
sin but that alone. Wherefore the sacrifice of masses, in the which
it is commonly said that the priest doth offer Christ for the quick
and the dead, to have remission of pain or guilt, is a blasphemous
fable and dangerous deceit.

### Article XXI—Of the Marriage of Ministers

The ministers of Christ are not commanded by God's law either to
vow the estate of single life, or to abstain from marriage;
therefore it is lawful for them, as for all other Christians, to
marry at their own discretion, as they shall judge the same to
serve best to godliness.

### Article XXII—Of the Rites and Ceremonies of Churches

It is not necessary that rites and ceremonies should in all places
be the same, or exactly alike; for they have been always different,
and may be changed according to the diversity of countries, times,
and men's manners, so that nothing be ordained against God's Word.
Whosoever, through his private judgment, willingly and purposely
doth openly break the rites and ceremonies of the church to which
he belongs, which are not repugnant to the Word of God, and are
ordained and approved by common authority, ought to be rebuked
openly, that others may fear to do the like, as one that offendeth
against the common order of the church, and woundeth the
consciences of weak brethren.

Every particular church may ordain, change, or abolish rites and
ceremonies, so that all things may be done to edification.

### Article XXIII—Of the Rulers of the United States of America

The President, the Congress, the general assemblies, the governors,
and the councils of state, as the delegates of the people, are the
rulers of the United States of America, according to the division
of power made to them by the Constitution of the United States and
by the constitutions of their respective states. And the said
states are a sovereign and independent nation, and ought not to be
subject to any foreign jurisdiction.

### Article XXIV—Of Christian Men's Goods

The riches and goods of Christians are not common as touching the
right, title, and possession of the same, as some do falsely boast.
Notwithstanding, every man ought, of such things as he possesseth,
liberally to give alms to the poor, according to his ability.

### Article XXV—Of a Christian Man's Oath

As we confess that vain and rash swearing is forbidden Christian
men by our Lord Jesus Christ and James his apostle, so we judge
that the Christian religion doth not prohibit, but that a man may
swear when the magistrate requireth, in a cause of faith and
charity, so it be done according to the prophet's teaching, in
justice, judgment, and truth.

### Of Sanctification

*The following Article from the Methodist Protestant Discipline is placed here by the Uniting Conference (1939). It was not one of the Articles of Religion voted upon by the three churches.*

Sanctification is that renewal of our fallen nature by the Holy
Ghost, received through faith in Jesus Christ, whose blood of
atonement cleanseth from all sin; whereby we are not only delivered
from the guilt of sin, but are washed from its pollution, saved
from its power, and are enabled, through grace, to love God with
all our hearts and to walk in his holy commandments blameless.

### Of the Duty of Christians to the Civil Authority

*The following provision was adopted by the Uniting Conference (1939). This statement seeks to interpret to our churches in foreign lands Article XXIII of the Articles of Religion. It is a legislative enactment but is not a part of the Constitution. (See Judicial Council Decisions 41, 176, and Decision 6, Interim Judicial Council.)*

It is the duty of all Christians, and especially of all Christian
ministers, to observe and obey the laws and commands of the
governing or supreme authority of the country of which they are
citizens or subjects or in which they reside, and to use all
laudable means to encourage and enjoin obedience to the powers that
be.



