The **Athanasian Creed** is a statement of Christian doctrine
traditionally ascribed to
[Athanasius](http://www.wikipedia.org/wiki/Athanasius_of_Alexandria "wikipedia:Athanasius of Alexandria")
(298 - 373 A.D.), Archbishop of Alexandria. However most of today's
historians agree that in all probability it was originally written
in Latin, not in Greek, and thus Athanasius cannot have been the
original author. Its theology is closely akin to that found in the
writing of western theologians, especially
[Ambrose of Milan](http://www.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ambrose_of_Milan "wikipedia:Ambrose of Milan")
(340 - 397 A.D.). It was designed to clearly affirm the
[deity of Christ](Deity_of_Christ "Deity of Christ") and the
doctrine of the [Trinity](Trinity "Trinity") as opposed to forms of
[Arianism](Arianism "Arianism").

## Text of the Creed

Whosoever will be saved, before all things it is necessary that he
hold the catholic faith. Which faith except everyone do keep whole
and undefiled, without doubt he shall perish everlastingly. And the
catholic faith is this: That we worship one God in Trinity, and
Trinity in Unity, neither confounding the persons, nor dividing the
substance.

For there is one Person of the Father, another of the Son, and
another of the Holy Spirit. But the godhead of the Father, of the
Son, and of the Holy Spirit, is all one, the glory equal, the
majesty co-eternal.

Such as the Father is, such is the Son, and such is the Holy
Spirit. The Father uncreated, the Son uncreated, and the Holy
Spirit uncreated. The Father incomprehensible, the Son
incomprehensible, and the Holy Spirit incomprehensible.

The Father eternal, the Son eternal, and the Holy Spirit eternal.
And yet they are not three eternals, but one Eternal.

As also there are not three incomprehensibles, nor three uncreated,
but one Uncreated, and one Incomprehensible. So likewise the Father
is Almighty, the Son Almighty, and the Holy Spirit Almighty. And
yet they are not three almighties, but one Almighty.

So the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Spirit is God.
And yet they are not three gods, but one God.

So likewise the Father is Lord, the Son Lord, and the Holy Spirit
Lord. And yet not three lords, but one Lord.

For as we are compelled by the Christian verity to acknowledge each
Person by Himself to be both God and Lord, so we are also forbidden
by the catholic religion to say that there are three gods or three
lords.

The Father is made of none, neither created, nor begotten. The Son
is of the Father alone, not made, nor created, but begotten. The
Holy Spirit is of the Father, neither made, nor created, nor
begotten, but proceeding.

So there is one Father, not three fathers; one Son, not three sons;
one Holy Spirit, not three holy spirits.

And in [Trinity](Trinity "Trinity") none is before or after
another; none is greater or less than another, but all three
Persons are co-eternal together and co-equal. So that in all
things, as is aforesaid, the Unity in Trinity and the Trinity in
Unity is to be worshipped.

He therefore that will be saved must think thus of the Trinity.

Furthermore, it is necessary to everlasting salvation that he also
believe rightly the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ. For the
right faith is, that we believe and confess, that our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, is God and man; God, of the substance of
the Father, begotten before the worlds; and man of the substance of
his mother, born in the world; perfect God and perfect man, of a
rational soul and human flesh subsisting. Equal to the Father, as
touching His godhead; and inferior to the Father, as touching His
manhood; who, although He is God and man, yet he is not two, but
one Christ; one, not by conversion of the godhead into flesh but by
taking of the manhood into God; one altogether; not by confusion of
substance, but by unity of person. For as the rational soul and
flesh is one man, so God and man is one Christ; who suffered for
our salvation, descended into hell, rose again the third day from
the dead. He ascended into heaven, He sits at the right hand of the
Father, God Almighty, from whence He will come to judge the quick
and the dead. At His coming all men will rise again with their
bodies and shall give account for their own works. And they that
have done good shall go into life everlasting; and they that have
done evil into everlasting fire.

This is the catholic faith, which except a man believe faithfully,
he cannot be saved.

## External links

-   There is a scholarly comparative edition of the original Latin
    text of the Athanasian creed, along with commentary on the older
    English translation at
    [http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/creeds2.iv.i.iv.html](http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/creeds2.iv.i.iv.html)



