The Bible's central message is **atonement**. From the first
stories in Genesis to the last visions of Revelation it is
everywhere apparent that God seeks to reconcile his people to
himself and that he has provided a way to do so.

The word **atonement**, is almost the only theological term of
English origin. It was likely first used in
[Tyndale's](William_Tyndale "William Tyndale") English translation
as derived from the adv. phrase *atonen*, meaning "in accord,"
literally, at one.^[[1]](#note-0)^ In the English Bible, it is
mainly used to translate the [Hebrew](Hebrew "Hebrew") word
*kipur*, although it is used once in the [King James](KJV "KJV")
[New Testament](New_Testament "New Testament") to translate the
[Greek](Greek "Greek") word *katallage* (see Romans 5:11). Most
modern translations render this word "reconciliation" in its other
occurrences throughout the N.T.

## Multimedia

-   The Work of Christ and Aspects of the Atonement -
    [Part 1](http://www.biblicaltraining.org/audio/TH504/theology_2_05_QT-high.mov),
    [Part 2](http://www.biblicaltraining.org/audio/TH504/theology_2_06_QT-high.mov),
    [Part 3](http://www.biblicaltraining.org/audio/TH504/theology_2_07_QT-high.mov),
    [Part 4](http://www.biblicaltraining.org/audio/TH504/theology_2_08_QT-high.mov)
    (QuickTime), by [Bruce Ware](Bruce_Ware "Bruce Ware") - Seminary
    lectures; part 1 starts on the topic of the atonement toward the
    end

## Contents

-   [1 Atonement in the Old Testament](#Atonement_in_the_Old_Testament)
    -   [1.1 Day of Atonement](#Day_of_Atonement)

-   [2 Atonement in the New Testament](#Atonement_in_the_New_Testament)
-   [3 Notes](#Notes)
-   [4 See also](#See_also)
-   [5 External links](#External_links)



## Atonement in the Old Testament

Certainly the most frequently mentioned means of atonement in the
Old Testament were the blood sacrifices, dominating the use of the
term by constant reference in the books of Leviticus and Numbers.
Atonement needed to be made for everything from heinous crimes like
idolatry (Num 16:47) to mistakes of intent, when the only sin was
ignorance or error, not willful disobedience (Num 15:22-29).

### Day of Atonement

The Day of Atonement was an annual day of repentance for the Old
Testament people of Israel the rites for which are set forth in
Leviticus chapter 16 (also see Exodus 30:10; Leviticus 23:27-31,
25:9; Numbers 29:7-11). It is described as a solemn fast, a
[Sabbath](Sabbath "Sabbath") on which no food or drink could be
consumed, and on which all work was forbidden. Sacrifices were
offered by the
[high priest](index.php?title=High_priest&action=edit&redlink=1 "High priest (page does not exist)")
as an atonement for himself and for the people.

The [Bible](Bible "Bible") calls the day *Yom Hakippurim* (Hebrew,
*Day of the Atonements*), which the Jewish people continue to
observe today as *Yom Kippur*.

"Perhaps the heart of the Old Testament teaching on atonement is
found in Leviticus 16, where the regulations for the Day of
Atonement occur. Five characteristics relating to the ritual of the
Day of Atonement are worthy of note because they are generally true
of atonement as it is found throughout Scripture: (1) the
sovereignty of God in atonement; (2) the purpose and result of
making atonement; (3) the two goats emphasize two different things,
and the burning another, about the removal of sin; (4) that Aaron
had to make special sacrifice for himself; (5) the comprehensive
quality of the act."
(*Baker's Evangelical Dictionary of Biblical Theology*, *s.v.*
atonement).

## Atonement in the New Testament

The New Testament presents the person and work of Christ as God's
ultimate provision for atonement. The English word *atonement* is
used to describe the New Testament concept of Christ presented as
our [reconciliation](Reconciliation "Reconciliation") (2 Cor.
5:18), as a [propitiation](Propitiation "Propitiation") (1 John
4:10), in giving his life as "a ransom for many" (Matt. 20:28),
having poured out his blood "for the forgiveness of sins" (Matt.
26:28).

"Particularly important for the full biblical picture of atonement
as it is found in Christ is the sacrifice Aaron makes for himself
and his family (Lev 16:11-14). Everyone, even the high priest, is
guilty and needs atonement that can only be provided by God
himself. The author of Hebrews emphasizes this point to make clear
his doctrine of the purity of Christ as both the true and perfect
sacrifice and the true and perfect priest who performs the ritual
of atonement (8:3-6; 9:6-15). The Old Testament sacrifices are
shown to be but shadows of the real sacrifice of Christ on the
cross by the fact of Aaron's sinfulness; an imperfect high priest
cannot offer a true sacrifice, just as the blood of bulls and goats
could never truly pay for the offense of human sin or substitute
for the shedding of human blood." (*Baker's*, *s.v.* atonement).

## Notes

1.  [â†‘](#ref-0)
    [Online Etymological Dictionary](http://www.etymonline.com/index.php?term=atone),
    s.v. atone.

## See also

-   [Atonement of Christ](Atonement_of_Christ "Atonement of Christ")

## External links

-   [Atonement](http://mb-soft.com/believe/text/atonemen.htm) from
    Elwell Evangelical Dictionary



