**Xi Shengmo** (c. 1830-1896, Traditional Chinese **席勝魔**,
Simplified Chinese **席胜魔**), also known as **Pastor Hsi**, was a
prodigious church planter and pastor in the Shanxi Province of
northern China. (In Chinese transliteration, *X* represents a sound
halfway between *s* or *sh* in English.)

Shengmo was born in Xi Liaozhi in a village near Linfen. He was
born into a wealthy family and trained as a Confucian scholar. For
a while he did well as a lawyer. His first wife passed away, but
even after he remarried he became troubled and turned to philosophy
and religion for answers, including
[Taoism](index.php?title=Taoism&action=edit&redlink=1 "Taoism (page does not exist)"),
which purported to offer immortality. During his study of Taoism,
he became seriously and chronically ill. He was persuaded to turn
to opium for relief, but became hopelessly addicted to it. Drought
plagued the land for several years, bringing famine, starvation and
cannibalism. Missionaries arrived from England to deliver aid,
preach the [Gospel](Gospel "Gospel"). The rain came and the famine
was eased.

The group most opposed to the missionaries were the scholars. To
try and reach the scholars, the missionaries offered prizes for
essays on spiritual topics. Xi won the top prize and the
missionary, David Hill, won his confidence by his godly demeanor.
Hill employed Xi to help him with literary matters. Xi became a
Christian by reading the
[New Testament](New_Testament "New Testament") and Hill helped him
to overcome his opium addiction. Xi felt, however, that his own
earnest prayers were the most important factor for overcoming.

He established a medical clinic, with a chapel in back for
[evangelism](Evangelism "Evangelism"). He then established refuges
for the cure of opium addicts in one place after another. These
refuges proved to be a very effective force for evangelism and
helped open the door for the entrance of Christianity in places
that would have otherwise remained closed. The foreign missionaries
helped Xi somewhat with such things as periodic
[Bible](Bible "Bible") training for the native evangelists and
sometimes Western [missionary](Missionary "Missionary")
physicians.

He was sacrificial in attending to the needs of others, although he
tried to keep the refuges self-supporting. His wife sold all her
jewelry to finance Christian work. One time when their missionary
work was desperate for funds, Xi noticed another literary contest.
This time he entered poetry, which won the prize and also initiated
within him the writing of many [hymns](Hymn "Hymn").

But perhaps the most notable thing about him was the way in which
he led out in the Christian missionary work in his area. The
general pattern was for Western Christians to enter an area, raise
up churches and then train local people as pastors and evangelists.
Xi Shengmo took hold of the work with such skill and energy that
the missionaries stood aside, to a considerable extent, as he
established clinics and churches.



