**Eve** was the first Woman (and second human) on the earth. She
was created in the
[Garden of Eden](Garden_of_Eden "Garden of Eden") by
[God](God "God") to be a companion of [Adam](Adam "Adam"). God
decided that "It is not good that the man should be alone; I will
make him a helper fit for him."

"So the LORD God caused a deep sleep to fall upon the man, and
while he slept took one of his ribs and closed up its place with
flesh. And the rib that the LORD God had taken from the man he made
into a woman and brought her to the man." Genesis 2:21, 22

God then told Adam and Eve that they could have anything in the
Garden of Eden that they wanted, but that they could not eat from
the [Tree of Knowledge](Tree_of_Knowledge "Tree of Knowledge") or
they would surely die.

## Fall Into Sin

A
[serpent](index.php?title=Serpent&action=edit&redlink=1 "Serpent (page does not exist)")
told Eve that she would not die if she ate from the tree, but that
she would have knowledge of all things. Eve was tempted and so she
took a bite of the fruit. She then gave it to Adam, and he ate
also. Their eyes were then opened and they knew that they were
naked so they went among the trees of the Garden and hid from God.
When God asked them why they were hiding and they replied that they
were naked, God knew that they had disobeyed Him and eaten from the
Tree of Knowledge. He did not kill them but punished them.

To Eve He gave pain in Childbirth and submission to the husband. "I
will surely multiply your pain in childbearing; in pain you shall
bring forth children. Your desire shall be for your husband, and he
shall rule over you."

To Adam He gave a life of hard work. "By the sweat of your face you
shall eat bread, till you return to the ground,".

God then expelled them from the Garden of Eden to live a life of
hardship and pain, only to end when death came. He then sealed the
Garden with a Cherubim and a flaming
[sword](index.php?title=Sword&action=edit&redlink=1 "Sword (page does not exist)").



*This article is a **[stub](http://www.theopedia.com/Category:Theopedia_stubs "Category:Theopedia stubs")**. Please edit it to add information.*


