## Multimedia

-   [The Sabbath and the Jubilee](http://forgeroadbiblechapel.org/html/Resources/Sermons%5C012107.mp3)
    - Tom Schetelich

## Contents

-   [1 The Biblical theology of the Sabbath](#The_Biblical_theology_of_the_Sabbath)
    -   [1.1 The Sabbath in the Pentateuch](#The_Sabbath_in_the_Pentateuch)
    -   [1.2 The Sabbath in the rest of the Old Testament](#The_Sabbath_in_the_rest_of_the_Old_Testament)
    -   [1.3 Jesus and the Sabbath](#Jesus_and_the_Sabbath)

-   [2 The Sabbath and the Christian church](#The_Sabbath_and_the_Christian_church)
-   [3 Relevant passages](#Relevant_passages)
-   [4 Resources](#Resources)
-   [5 External links](#External_links)

## The Biblical theology of the Sabbath

### The Sabbath in the Pentateuch

The first appearance of the Sabbath in the
[Old Testament](Old_Testament "Old Testament") is an implicit
reference in [Genesis](Genesis "Genesis") 1:14b, where the word
translated "seasons" is used as a technical term throughout the
[Pentateuch](Pentateuch "Pentateuch") in the context of the
[Israelite](Israel "Israel") *cultus*, often for "festivals". The
Sabbath is mentioned more explicitly in Genesis 2:2-3, where God
rests on the seventh day from all the work of creating that he had
done. We may say that one of Moses' aims in his construction of
[Genesis 1](Genesis_1 "Genesis 1") is to teach us about a proper
view of the Sabbath and of work. Work is not the ultimate goal of
creation, rest is!

In the Law, the Israelites are given specific instruction on how to
approach the Sabbath. Within the Decalogue, the fourth commandment
is to "remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy"
([Ex](Book_of_Exodus "Book of Exodus"). 20:8, ESV). Further
instructions follow at the beginning of Exodus 23 and at the end of
Exodus 31, all of which emphasise the importance of keeping the
Sabbath as a holy day and a day of rest. The Israelites learn,
practically, how to observe the Sabbath in Exodus 16, where God
provides manna for his people for six days. On the sixth day, he
provides a double portion which, unlike previous portions, remains
fresh overnight; on the seventh day, God rests from providing the
manna and the people rest from collecting it; other instances
include the stoning of a man found gathering sticks outside the
camp on the Sabbath ([Num](Numbers "Numbers"). 15).

God also commanded that Israelite worship move to the weekly rhythm
of six days of labour and one of rest. The high priest would
arrange an offering of bread and incense; the priests would eat the
bread and the incense would be offered to the LORD
([Lev](Leviticus "Leviticus"). 20:8). In addition to the daily
burnt and drink offerings, a Sabbath offering of two lambs was
commanded (Num. 28:9).

In the Pentateuch, then, we find that God's goal for creation is
not work, but rest. The Sabbath plays a role in reminding God's
people of this truth, for God's people rest on the Sabbath day.
While they are commanded to make offerings daily, they are
commanded to make further offerings on the Sabbath (as well, of
course, as at other special feasts).

### The Sabbath in the rest of the Old Testament

In the remainder of the Old Testament, the Sabbath is tied very
closely to the concept of rest. In Joshua, the land and the people
of God are given rest from war
([Josh](Book_of_Joshua "Book of Joshua").
[14](index.php?title=Joshua_14&action=edit&redlink=1 "Joshua 14 (page does not exist)"):15,
[21](index.php?title=Joshua_21&action=edit&redlink=1 "Joshua 21 (page does not exist)"):44).
The judges Othniel, Deborah, Ehud and Gideon are each recorded as
having brought rest to the land
([Judges](Book_of_Judges "Book of Judges") 3:11, 3:30, 5:31 and
8:28), and yet, each time, the people disobey God, forget his
commands and turn away to false gods. It is plain that the people
of God cannot remain in God's rest by their own strength. We may
suppose that it is considerations such as these which caused the
psalmist, in [Psalm](Book_of_Psalms "Book of Psalms")
[95](index.php?title=Psalms_95&action=edit&redlink=1 "Psalms 95 (page does not exist)")
to say that God declared that the disobedient generation would
"never enter [his] rest".

A small number of the psalms approach the topic of the Sabbath. It
is evident from Psalm
[92](index.php?title=Psalms_92&action=edit&redlink=1 "Psalms 92 (page does not exist)")
that the Sabbath was used as a day for personal worship and
reflection: the psalmist here contemplates the Lord's provision for
him, personally.

Much of the interaction of the people of God with his Sabbath
occurs in the context of its neglect. The prophet Jeremiah took a
warning to the people of Judah, that they should keep the Sabbath,
or face the desolation of Jerusalem
([Jer](Book_of_Jeremiah "Book of Jeremiah").
[17](index.php?title=Jeremiah_17&action=edit&redlink=1 "Jeremiah 17 (page does not exist)")).
The Chronicler records that Nebuchadnezzar sacked Jerusalem and
took its people into exile, "to fulfill the word of the LORD by the
mouth of Jeremiah, until the land had enjoyed its Sabbaths. All the
days that it lay desolate it kept Sabbath, to fulfill seventy
years." ([2 Chr](Books_of_Chronicles "Books of Chronicles").
[36](index.php?title=2_Chronicles_36&action=edit&redlink=1 "2 Chronicles 36 (page does not exist)"):21)

However, God declares that "from one Sabbath to another, all
mankind will come and bow down before [him]"
([Isaiah](Book_of_Isaiah "Book of Isaiah")
[66](index.php?title=Isaiah_66&action=edit&redlink=1 "Isaiah 66 (page does not exist)"):23,
NIV), promising that, in spite of Israel's history of
Sabbath-breaking and in spite of the exile now in place, one day,
the whole earth — all mankind — will worship God in truth, on his
Sabbath.

The Old Testament moves from a universal rest proclaimed by God in
Genesis, to a day of rest for the people of God, which recalls and
signifies that rest. Those people repeatedly break his rest, leave
his rest and abuse his rest, and yet, God in mercy promises that
all mankind will, one day, experience his rest as he intended it to
be experienced.

### Jesus and the Sabbath

The most well-known interactions of the
[Lord Jesus](Lord_Jesus "Lord Jesus") with the Sabbath laws are his
Sabbath healings, which inevitably caused controversy with the
party of the [Pharisees](Pharisees "Pharisees"). His famous
question, "which is lawful on the Sabbath: to do good or to do
evil, to save life or to kill?"
([Mark](Gospel_of_Mark "Gospel of Mark")
[3:4](http://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=mark%202:23-3:6;&version=31;))
is occasioned by a handicapped man who presents himself to Jesus,
in the synagogue, for healing; while the example of teachers who
would lift an ox or a donkey out of a pit on a Sabbath was brought
about by an indignant synagogue ruler who castigated the Lord for
freeing a crippled woman from her infirmity
([Luke](Gospel_of_Luke "Gospel of Luke")
[13:10–17](http://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=luke%2013:10-17;&version=31;)).

To a group of Pharisees, earlier in the passage from Mark, Jesus
declared that "the Sabbath was made for man, not man for the
Sabbath. So the Son of Man is Lord even of the Sabbath." In his
teaching on the Sabbath, at no point did Jesus deny the validity of
the law, although he did frequently attack its abuses.

However, we must also look to the development of Sabbatical themes
within the Gospels as we look to Jesus' interaction with this topic
of the Sabbath. One of these themes, perhaps the most striking, is
that of *rest*. In [Matt.](Gospel_of_Matthew "Gospel of Matthew")
[11:25–30](http://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Matthew%2011:25-30;&version=31;),
Jesus tells all who are weary and burdened to come to him, and he
will give them rest. The rest promised in the Pentateuch, pointed
to by the Sabbath of the Old Covenant, is the rest which is found
in Jesus, and in him only.

In Judges, we saw that God's leaders were to bring rest to the land
and its people; we also saw that these leaders could only bring a
limited rest for a limited time. However, this points forward to
the need of God's true Judge, appointed to judge the world in
justice; and, therefore, to the rest of God not simply as
[soteriology](Soteriology "Soteriology") but as
[eschatology](Eschatology "Eschatology"), for the rest which we
taste now will be given to us in full when the Lord returns.

## The Sabbath and the Christian church

The two forms of the ten commandments give different, but related
reasons for remembering the Sabbath. In Exodus, the command is
enjoined with an echo of Genesis 2:3, "For in six days the LORD
made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that is in them, and rested
the seventh day. Therefore the LORD blessed the Sabbath day and
made it holy." (Exodus 20:11) But, in Deuteronomy it is explained
that this commandment was given to Israel as a memorial of their
deliverance from Egypt, "You shall remember that you were a slave
in the land of Egypt, and the LORD your God brought you out from
there with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm. Therefore the
LORD your God commanded you to keep the Sabbath day" (Deuteronomy
5:15).

In the case of the Exodus form of the command, the "rest" of God is
given as the exemplar of the Sabbath ordained for man. God made the
seventh day holy, because on it he had ceased from the work of
creation. This is not done for his own sake, but for those who
would live and work within the finished creation: that is, for man.
Thus, Jesus says, "The Sabbath was made for man, not man for the
Sabbath" (Mark 2:27). However, in the case of Deuteronomy's form of
the command, the work of God in delivering Israel out of Egypt is
given as the reason for observing the sabbath. This additional,
special reason, had already been intimated in Exodus 31:13-17, "...
Above all you shall keep my Sabbaths, for this is a sign between me
and you throughout your generations, that you may know that I, the
LORD, sanctify you ...", so that their deliverance out of Egypt is
shown to be analogous to the creation of the world, when God
sanctified the seventh day.

From this two-fold reason for keeping the Sabbath, Christian
theologians since ancient times have perceived that the command has
a dual character: partly an ordinance of blessing and holiness
enacted by God over the whole finished work of creation, and partly
an ordinance of the redemptive covenant made with Israel, enacted
by God through his deliverance of them out of the land of Egypt to
call them unto holiness. As an ordinance over creation, the Sabbath
sets a seal upon the light, the sky, the dry land and life, the
heavenly host and all living creatures, for as long as creation
endures; it is a blessing ordained for mankind, confirming his
dominion over the earth, conferring a blessing on marriage and
children, as long as the creation endures. As an ordinance of
redemption from slavery, it was a command tied to the covenant made
with Israel, which in keeping it signified to them that God who
began a good work in them would complete it, to sanctify them, to
be their Redeemer.

In this way, it is shown that the ethical aspect of the command,
concerning the holiness intended by God from the beginning, is
fulfilled only in freedom to live unto God through God's work of
redemption. The special, covenantal aspects of the ordinance were
new and tied to the elect people, Israel, with a view to leading
them toward this rest. However, the command based on the
deliverance out of Egypt did not give to them the rest in holiness
implied in it, and anticipated a fuller freedom. These "weak and
beggarly elements" of the command are superseded when a fuller
redemption comes, in Christ, setting Man free from that which
enslaves and subjects to futility both Man and the creation subject
to him, which is sin and death.

> Therefore let no one pass judgment on you in questions of food and
> drink, or with regard to a festival or a new moon or a Sabbath.
> These are a shadow of the things to come, but the substance belongs
> to Christ.
> 
> {{\#if:Colossians 2:16-17|
> —Colossians 2:16-17{{\#if:|*{{{3}}}*}}
> }}

Colossians 2:16-17 is central to debate among Christians,
concerning how the New Testament sees the development in the person
of Christ, of the theme of the Sabbath together with its sub-themes
of rest and worship. All agree that the rest which the Sabbath
promised is found in Jesus and his finished work, and that the
worship and service of God which the Sabbath enjoined is offered
through Christ. But, some Christians interpret Paul as declaring
that to keep a set time for resting from work for the sake of
worship and works of mercy, as is indicated by the Jewish Law, is
no longer applicable because the reality to which the law pointed
has arrived.

The historical fact given as Israel's basis for keeping the sabbath
has been superseded by another historical fact, that Christ rose
from the dead on the first day (Mt. 28:1; Mk. 16:2, 9; Lk. 24:1;
Jn. 20:1). As the Sabbath did not originate in a command but in
God's finished work of creating, so the keeping of the first day of
the week originates not in a command but in God's finished work.
The Lord himself made the day holy, when he finished his work of
redemption. Rising from the dead he showed himself to us then and
for weeks afterward, on that day. He promised us the Holy Spirit
and sent the Spirit to us on that day. Visiting us in miracles and
holy judgment when we gathered in hope of the Day of our
resurrection, He also confirmed our hope by returning Eutychus from
the dead before our eyes, on that day. It has been on this day that
the people have come together to hear the gospel and to collect
offerings for mercy, from the beginning.

Perhaps we can say that, it is less that we keep a day than that
the Lord keeps us, and makes known to us on the day that we are
assembled together each week that He is the one who sanctifies us
as one people. We gather to Him as the first fruits of that
redemption, on the day hallowed by Christ's finished work and by
our communion in it through the Holy Spirit who raised him from the
dead, which we remember by sharing the bread of a new creation, and
the cup of blessing, on the Lord's day. For these reasons, although
acknowledging the blessed difference between the Lord's day and the
Jewish day of rest, Reformed confessions often refer to the first
day as the "Christian Sabbath" in order to testify to the
continuity of God's redemptive purpose, and to make known that the
freedom of holiness spoken of by God for the sake of the whole
world has been fulfilled in Christ. Instead of rest symbolized by
cessation of work for a day, what typifies the Christian Sabbath
keeping is coming to Christ, and points to his return and eternal
life: "Come to me, all who labor and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest" (Matthew 11:28). But this Life in Christ is not a
private affair: “ ... let us consider how to stir up one another to
love and good works, not neglecting to meet together, as is the
habit of some, but encouraging one another, and all the more as you
see the Day drawing near” (Hebrews 10:24,25). Therefore, there is
left for the people of God, a Sabbath keeping.

## Relevant passages

-   Exodus 20:8
-   Exodus 23:12
-   Exodus 31:15
-   Deuteronomy 5:12
-   Leviticus 26:2
-   Matthew 12:8
-   Mark 2:27
-   Romans 14:5
-   Colossians 2:16

## Resources

-   Marva J. Dawn,
    [The Sense of the Call: A Sabbath Way of Life for Those Who Serve God, the Church, and the World](http://books.google.ca/books?id=jmL86d8qa4oC&printsec=frontcover)

## External links

-   [The Sabbath and the Lord's Day](http://www.blueletterbible.org/faq/sabbath.html)
    (Blue Letter Bible)
-   [Eat the Fat, Drink the Sweet, and Be Merry - A biblical defense for play on the Lord's Day](http://reformedperspectives.org/newfiles/cha_jacob/TH.Jacob.Sabbath.html),
    by Charles L. Jacob
-   [On the Sabbath](http://www.datarat.net/DR/sabbath.html), by
    [John Murray](John_Murray "John Murray")
-   [The Sabbath Rest](http://www.beginningwithmoses.org/articles/ng_sabbathrest.htm),
    by Joshua Ng
-   [Biblical Theology of Sabbath](http://beginningwithmoses.org/articles/sheadsabbath.htm),
    by Andrew G. Shead
-   [Should we keep the Sabbath or not?](http://www.carm.org/diff/Exod20_8.htm),
    by Matt Slick
-   [Three Views of Sunday](http://www.challies.com/archives/000800.php),
    by Don Whitney
-   [Saturday Question: When does your "Lord's Day" begin?](http://theologica.blogspot.com/2008/08/saturday-question-when-does-your-lords.html),
    by David Reimer

-   [Is the Sabbath Still Required for Christians?](http://thegospelcoalition.org/blogs/justintaylor/2010/10/14/schreiner-qa-is-the-sabbath-still-required-for-christians/),
    with excerpt from [Tom Schreiner](Tom_Schreiner "Tom Schreiner")



