**Sacerdotalism** (from the Latin *sacerdos* - **priest**) is the
belief in a priestly system where the priest has been given the
special authority to act as a spiritual mediator between God and
mankind. The [Roman Catholic](Roman_Catholic "Roman Catholic"),
[Eastern Orthodox](Eastern_Orthodox "Eastern Orthodox"), and high
[Anglican](Anglican "Anglican") traditions are sacerdotal. Although
the priests are not supposed to be seen as better or more godly
than others, their role in the sacraments of the church give them a
special "mediatorial" role, as representatives of the Church
(Christ's body on earth) and thus of Christ. This is especially
noticeable in the Roman Catholic confession, mass, and last rites.

In [Protestantism](Protestantism "Protestantism"), if we except
high Anglicans, there are no earthly "mediators," because each
believer has the [Holy Spirit](Holy_Spirit "Holy Spirit") in them.
The [Reformers](Reformation "Reformation") rejected the sacerdotal
system altogether, and substituted for it the general
[priesthood of all believers](Priesthood_of_all_believers "Priesthood of all believers"),
who have direct access to Christ as our only Mediator and Advocate,
and are to offer the spiritual sacrifices of prayer, praise, and
intercession.

As the [apostle Paul](Apostle_Paul "Apostle Paul") said, "there is
one God, and there is **one mediator** between God and men, the man
Christ Jesus," (1 Tim. 2:5 ESV).






