**Satan** is one name for the biblical character also known as the
"devil", "adversary" or "accuser", "serpent" or "dragon", "enemy",
"evil one" and "Lucifer", among others. He is generally considered
to be an [angel](Angels "Angels") of the highest order who was at
one time at peace with and in the service of [God](God "God") but
subsequently rebelled against God, causing his expulsion from
[Heaven](Heaven "Heaven") and to Earth. The word "satan" comes from
the common [Old Testament](Old_Testament "Old Testament") usage of
the [Hebrew](Hebrew "Hebrew") word "ha-satan", literally "the
adversary", generally describing the legal role of plaintiff or
accuser. Satan, and the other angels who sided with his rebellion
([demons](Demons "Demons")), are commonly described as beings which
seek to thwart the purpose of God primarily through tempting
humanity away from a moral existence founded in dependence on God
to a self-centered, amoral lifestyle.

**Multimedia**

-   [The Devil](http://www.trinitylectures.org/MP3/The_Devil.mp3),
    by John Robbins (MP3)

## Contents

-   [1 Conceptual Evolution in and out of Scripture](#Conceptual_Evolution_in_and_out_of_Scripture)
-   [2 Related passages](#Related_passages)
-   [3 See also](#See_also)
-   [4 External Links](#External_Links)

## Conceptual Evolution in and out of Scripture

In Scriptural passages such as Genesis' confrontation between
[Eve](Eve "Eve") and the serpent and also his appearances in the
book of [Job](Job "Job"), Satan takes on the role of a legal
adversary. It is as though humanity is on trial and he accuses them
before God, who is in the role as a judge. Satan appears as a tool
of God's justice, himself also subject to the rule of God.

Between the Old and New Testaments the Jewish understanding of the
spiritual realm developed greatly, as can be seen in many books of
the Apocrypha. This growth includes an understanding of the role
and nature of Satan as more than a legal adversary in God's service
into a force that needs to be reckoned with, in daily life as well
as in the judgment of the Day of the Lord.

There are many conjectures as to when Satan moved from this role of
"court employee" of God into an outright enemy of God and his
people. Chapter 12 of the Revelation of Jesus Christ portrays an
allegorical story of a woman, a child and a dragon. The woman is a
dual metaphor representing the life of the people of God (as the
nation of Israel the Church) and also as [Mary](Mary "Mary") the
mother of Jesus, who is the child. The dragon is Satan. The
allegory, when it points to history at the time of Christ's earthly
ministry, not only seems to give a time frame for a change in
Satan's status in heaven and his relationship to humanity, but also
seems to place his rebellion at the time of Christ's birth. Some
theologians have suggested that Satan, as the arrogant angel,
assumed his rightful place as what was given to Jesus by the
Father, and that Jesus' birth was the Event which denied Satan that
position, taking what as perhaps subdued discontent to overt
rebellion.

Following the birth of Jesus, the next major encounter with Satan
is Jesus' Temptation at the start of his earthly ministry. The text
portrays Satan as a being who owns the kingdoms of the world,
desperate to keep it for himself. He is no longer a servant of
God's justice but is in open rebellion, seeking to disrupt God's
plans for his people and his world.

These themes develop further through Jesus words in the gospel
texts and even more so in the epistles of the New Testament. In one
sense, Satan is perceived as being marginal because the theology of
the New Testament assumes that Satan has already been defeated
through the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. Though he still operates
as an enemy to the purposes of God, his efforts are ultimately
futile.

At the end of history, again referencing the Revelation of Jesus
Christ, Satan suffers the same eternal damnation that all enemies
of God suffer and has no place or role within the New Heaven and
New Earth of the Resurrection.

## Related passages

-   Gen. 3:1-7
-   Acts 19:13-19
-   Lev. 19:26,31
-   2 Cor. 10:3-5
-   Lev.20:6
-   2 Cor. 11:2
-   Deut. 18:9-13
-   Eph. 6:10-18
-   Is. 14
-   Col. 2:15
-   Ezek. 28

-   1 Thess. 2:18
-   Mt. 12:22-29
-   1 Thess. 3:5
-   Mt. 13:19; 36-43
-   2 Tim. 2:26
-   Mt. 17:19,20
-   Heb. 2:14
-   Mk. 5:1-13
-   James 4:7
-   Mk. 9:28,29
-   1 Pet. 5:8,9

-   Lk. 4:1-13
-   1 Jn. 4:4
-   Jn. 8:44
-   Rev. 12:4,10,11
-   Jn. 10:10
-   Rev. 13:4,11
-   Jn. 13:2,27
-   Rev. 20:1-3, 7-10
-   Acts 5:3

## See also

-   [Demons](Demons "Demons")
-   [Angels](Angels "Angels")

## External Links

-   [Who is Satan?](http://www.carm.org/questions/whois_satan.htm),
    by Matt Slick
-   [Satanology](http://www.bible.org/page.asp?page_id=389), by J.
    Hampton Keathley
-   [Satanology](http://dentonbible.org/realaudio/692-062396-THEOLOGY6.rm)
    (Real Audio), by
    [Thomas Nelson](index.php?title=Thomas_Nelson&action=edit&redlink=1 "Thomas Nelson (page does not exist)")
-   [The Doctrine of Satan](http://www.refuge-outreach.org/christianity/doctrine/satan/home.html)



