The **Scofield Reference Bible** is a widely circulated annotated
study [Bible](Bible "Bible") that first appeared in 1909, and
revised in 1917. These first editions were published by the Oxford
University Press. The original versions contained the traditional
[King James Version](King_James_Version "King James Version") text
edited and annotated by
[Cyrus I. Scofield](Cyrus_I._Scofield "Cyrus I. Scofield").

This annotated Bible contained several innovative features. It
introduced a chain cross-referencing system that tied together
related verses of Scripture and allowed the reader to follow
biblical themes from one book and chapter to the next. It featured
an attempt to date the events of the Bible chronologically, and the
text contains a running commentary that sets a year or approximate
year for each page of the Bible text. It was in the pages of the
*Scofield Reference Bible* that many
[fundamentalist](Fundamentalism "Fundamentalism") Christians
encountered Archbishop James Ussher's calculation fixing the date
of Creation at 4004 BC, and it was largely due to Scofield's Bible
notes that [creationism](Creationism "Creationism") became a major
issue among Christian fundamentalists.

The *Scofield Reference Bible* also taught the
[dispensational](Dispensationalism "Dispensationalism") scheme of
interpretation and through its popularity became the chief vehicle
by which this theological perspective was propagated among
Christian fundamentalists and independents in the United States.

The original and 1917 text of the *Scofield Reference Bible* has
fallen into the public domain in the United States. Oxford
University Press continues to publish revised editions of this
Bible under the title *Oxford Scofield Study Bible*, which it
offers with a variety of translations in addition to the original
King James Version. These modern revisions have muted somewhat the
more extravagant claims of Scofield's early dispensationalism.

## See also

-   [Dispensationalism](Dispensationalism "Dispensationalism")
-   [Cyrus I. Scofield](Cyrus_I._Scofield "Cyrus I. Scofield")
-   [R. Todd Mangum & Mark Sweetnam](index.php?title=R._Todd_Mangum_&_Mark_Sweetnam&action=edit&redlink=1 "R. Todd Mangum & Mark Sweetnam (page does not exist)"),
    *The Scofield Bible: Its History and Impact on the Evangelical Church*.
    Paternoster, 2009.
    [ISBN 1606570331](http://www.theopedia.com/Special:BookSources/1606570331)

## External link

-   Searchable text of the 1917 version of the
    *[Scofield Reference Bible](http://www.studylight.org/com/srn/)*
    reference notes.



