Sonship is a key theme in the
[Gospel of John](Gospel_of_John "Gospel of John"). There are three
titles given to Jesus that use son language – “Son of Man”, “Son of
God” and just “the Son”. Each of these holds different
implications; “Son of Man” refers to Daniel 7:13 and shows that
Jesus is the eternal king of the world. Similarly, “Son of God”
refers to Jesus claim to be the
[messiah](Messiah_in_the_Gospel_of_John "Messiah in the Gospel of John").
“The Son” holds the most information about the relationship between
God and Jesus.

## Son of Man

Jesus calls himself the [Son of Man](Son_of_Man "Son of Man") 11
times in John's gospel. As in the
[Synoptic Gospels](Synoptic_Gospels "Synoptic Gospels"), this title
is one of Jesus’ preferred titles for himself. The title is most
likely a reference to Daniel 7:13-14, in which Daniel describes one
of his apocalyptic visions.

"I saw in the night visions, and behold, with the clouds of heaven
there came one like a son of man, and he came to the Ancient of
Days and was presented before him. And to him was given dominion
and glory and a kingdom, that all peoples, nations, and languages
should serve him; his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which
shall not pass away, and his kingdom one that shall not be
destroyed."
This Son of Man figure was part of the Jewish expectations for the
new age and the redemption of God’s people that is foretold by the
Old Testament. Many Jews expected the son of man to be the
[Messiah](Messiah "Messiah"). As Daniel says, he is to be the ruler
of God’s future eternal kingdom (see
[Son of Man](Son_of_Man "Son of Man") article for more detail). By
calling himself the Son of Man, Jesus is claiming to be God’s
future King who would rule forever. This title is important in the
[eschatology](index.php?title=Eschatology_in_the_Gospel_of_John&action=edit&redlink=1 "Eschatology in the Gospel of John (page does not exist)")
of this Gospel, as it is a key clue that God’s future Kingdom was
being created through Jesus.

The passages where Jesus calls himself the Son of Man teach key
themes of John. The Son of Man in Daniel is given authority to rule
over the world. Jesus states that God has given him authority to
judge at the Resurrection because he is the Son of Man (5:27). He
also has the ability to give life to those who “eat his flesh and
drink his blood” (John 6:27, 53). Jesus then calls the man healed
from blindness to have faith in the Son of Man, whom he clearly
says is himself (John 9:35-37).

In John 3:13, Jesus states that he descended from heaven, and in
John 6:62 he states that he will return there. In his statement to
Nathaniel in (John 1:51), Jesus refers to Jacob’s dream of a ladder
on which angels ascend and descend (Gen 28:12-13). By describing
himself as this ladder, Jesus shows that he links both heaven and
earth. Only Jesus, the Son of man, can bring heaven down to earth
and earth up to heaven. "...as Son of man, Jesus comes into the
world, dies, is exalted, and is given the authority to execute
judgment" ^[[1]](#note-0)^

In John 3:13-15, after stating that he has come from heaven, Jesus
continues saying that he will be “lifted up” so that those who
believe in him will have eternal life. He does not elaborate on
what “lifted up” means at the time, but this is a clear reference
to his crucifixion. In John 8:28, Jesus says that this will be
proof of his claims about himself. In his last public speech, Jesus
announces that the time has come for the Son of Man to be glorified
– by which he means his death and resurrection. By being glorified
in this way, he also glorifies God (John 13:31).

## Son of God

One of the more contentious titles used in John is ‘Son of God’. It
has often been used in parallel to “Son of Man” to prove the
parallel humanity and divinity of Jesus. Other scholars argue that
that ‘the Son’ and ‘Son of God’ are synonymous. ^[[2]](#note-1)^
However, where Jesus uses ‘the Son’ to refer to himself and his
mission, the specific phrase ‘Son of God’ is almost always used
simply as a title.^[[3]](#note-2)^ Edwards particularly highlights
that the title is placed in apposition with Christ twice in the
Gospel, and once connected with ‘King of Israel’, possibly as a
means of explaining the Jewish term to Gentile readers or expanding
the theme.^[[4]](#note-3)^ This suggests that in John, the specific
title ‘Son of God’ is not so much a statement of Jesus’ divinity,
rather than a statement of his
[messiahship](Messiah_in_the_Gospel_of_John "Messiah in the Gospel of John").

## The Son

Jesus calls God ‘the Father’ or ‘my Father’ 107 times and refers to
himself as ‘the Son of God’ or simply ‘the son’ in context with
‘the Father’ around 30 times. John 5:18 shows that his
contemporaries understood him to be ‘making himself equal with
God’. This theme is first raised in the Prologue which uses the
word μονογενης (monogenes – John 1:14, 18), which also appears in
John 3:16-18. The translation of μονογενης is contentious, but it
is used frequently in the [LXX](LXX "LXX") and the
[Apocrypha](Apocrypha "Apocrypha") to refer to a unique son. The
word is used about
[Isaac](index.php?title=Isaac&action=edit&redlink=1 "Isaac (page does not exist)"),
and for adopted sons, so ‘one-of-a-kind’ is a better translation
than ‘only-begotten’.^[[5]](#note-4)^ This places Jesus in a unique
relationship with the Father. This relationship is further
emphasized in the latter half of the Gospel when Jesus claims to be
one with the Father (Rom 10:30, 38; 14:10-11; 17:11), existing
before creation (Rom 17:5), and owning all that God owns (Rom
16:15; 17:10). This is developed further in Jesus’ last discourse,
until the disciples recognize in Rom 20:28 that Jesus is God
incarnate.^[[6]](#note-5)^. However, in this unity, there is still
a distinction held in the Father-Son language leaving us with a
united-but-separate view of the relationship. This distinction is
most revealed in the ‘sending’ language. Many times Jesus describes
himself as being sent by the Father.^[[7]](#note-6)^

One aspect of this Father-Son relationship is love. This is
introduced in John 3:35 and raised again in 5:20. The Father loves
the Son (John 15:9, 17:23-29) and the Son loves the Father (John
14:31). Out of that love, Jesus is obedient to his Father (John
14:31), and he loves the Son because of that obedience (John
10:17). This obedience is already implied in the concept of ‘being
sent’, but is further defined in later passages; Jesus obeys the
will of the father (John 6:38), does his work (John 17:4) and
speaks what he has been commanded (John 12:49-50). Further
references to this obedience are evenly spread throughout the
Gospel. Even this obedience infers a unity and equality with the
Father (John 5:17, 14:10). Jesus’ obedience is reflected in
[his mission](index.php?title=Jesus_Mission_in_the_Gospel_of_John&action=edit&redlink=1 "Jesus Mission in the Gospel of John (page does not exist)")



