[![image](images/thumb/1/18/StephenBeingStoned.jpg/300px-StephenBeingStoned.jpg)](http://www.theopedia.com/File:StephenBeingStoned.jpg)
[![image](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAA8AAAALCAAAAACFLIiAAAAAAnRSTlMA/1uRIrUAAABPSURBVAjXY/j///+5vXDwjAHIr26ZAgXZe8H8a/+hoIcw/9nevdVL9+79DuPvzQYZFPUezu8BMZLXgkExnD8HAu6hqv//n+HZVjD4DuUDAKlChD3fj6aPAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)](http://www.theopedia.com/File:StephenBeingStoned.jpg "Enlarge")
Stephen being stoned
That **Stephen** was a Jew is unquestionable, and he probably was a
Hellenist of the Dispersion, who spoke Greek. The name Stephen is
Greek, Stephanos, and signifies "crown". The circumstances of his
conversion to Christianity are not known.

The Apostles assembled the faithful and told them that they could
not relinquish the duties of preaching and prayer to attend to the
care of tables; and recommended them to choose seven men of good
character, full of the [Holy Ghost](Holy_Spirit "Holy Spirit") and
wisdom, who might superintend that business. The people chose
Stephen, "a man full of faith and of the Holy Ghost", and Philip,
Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, and Nicholas. These seven were
presented to the Apostles, who, praying, imposed hands upon them,
and so ordained them the first deacons.

Stephen spoke with such wisdom and spirit that his hearers were
unable to resist him, and a plot was laid by the elders of certain
synagogues in Jerusalem. The main point urged against him was that
he affirmed that the temple would be destroyed, that the Mosaic
traditions were but shadows and types no longer acceptable to
[God](God "God"), [Jesus](Jesus "Jesus") of Nazareth having put an
end to them.

Stephen was allowed to speak and in a long defense laid out in
[Acts](Acts "Acts") 7:2-53, he showed that
[Abraham](Abraham "Abraham"), the father and founder of their
nation, was justified and received the greatest favours of God in a
foreign land; that Moses was commanded to set up a Temple, but it
was not to be imagined that God was confined in houses made by
hands: the temple and the Mosaic law were temporary, and were to
give place when God introduced more excellent institutions by
sending the Messiah himself. He ended with a stinging rebuke: "You
stiff-necked and uncircumcised in hearts and ears, you always
resist the Holy Spirit; as your fathers did, so do you also. Which
of the prophets have not your fathers persecuted? And they have
slain them who foretold the coming of the Just One, of whom you
have been now the betrayers and murderers: who have received the
law by the disposition of angels, and have not kept it."

The whole assembly raged at Stephen, but he, being full of the Holy
Spirit and looking up steadfastly to the heavens, saw them opened
and beheld the glory of God and the Saviour standing at the right
hand of the Father. And he said, "Behold, I see the heavens opened,
and the Son of Man standing on the right hand of God". And they,
crying out with a loud voice, stopped their ears and with one
accord ran violently upon him. And, casting him forth without the
city, they stoned him; and the witnesses laid down their garments
at the feet of a young man whose name was Saul. And they stoned
Stephen, invoking and saying, "Lord Jesus, receive my spirit". And
falling on his knees, he cried with a loud voice, saying, "Lord,
lay not this sin to their charge". And when he had said this he
fell asleep in the Lord.
[[1]](http://www.byzantines.net/StStephen/StStephen.htm), (Derived
from Butler's *Lives of the Saints*, revised edition, Copyright
Burns and Oates, 1991)

## See also

-   [Martyr](Martyr "Martyr")
-   [Acts of the Apostles](Acts_of_the_Apostles "Acts of the Apostles")
-   [Church history](Church_history "Church history")



