**Subordinationism** is an [heretical](Heresy "Heresy") view that
God the Son and God the Holy Spirit are not merely relationally
subordinate to God the Father, but also subordinate in nature and
being. In other words, this view maintains that, within the
[Trinity](Trinity "Trinity"), the Son and the Spirit are
ontologically inferior to the Father. To the contrary,
[orthodox](Orthodox "Orthodox") doctrine maintains that although
there is no autonomous Person of the Trinity, none who is God apart
from any other Person, yet each Person is *autotheos* ("αυτοθεος"
-*God in and of himself*).

"In the early centuries, the struggle to understand the human and
divine natures of Christ often led to placing the Son in a
secondary position to the Father.
[Justin Martyr](Justin_Martyr "Justin Martyr"),
[Origen](Origen "Origen"), and
[Tertullian](Tertullian "Tertullian") all evidence a certain amount
of subordinationism in their writings. . . This incipient
subordinationism, especially that of Origen, eventually led to
[Arianism](Arianism "Arianism") and other systems such as
[Sabellianism](Sabellianism "Sabellianism"), Monarchianism, and
Macedonianism. Arius, who would allow no intermediary being between
the supremacy of the One God and his creatures, denied the full
deity of Christ. From this it followed that Christ the Word was
less than God incarnate and was instead a subordinate image of the
Father. In subordinationism lay the roots from which modern
[unitarianism](Unitarianism "Unitarianism") and related theologies
were to spring."^[[1]](#note-0)^

This should not be confused with the eternal functional
subordination of the Son held by Nicene and post-Nicene fathers,
accepted within the creeds of the Church, and recognized as
orthodox by theologians through the present era. Whereas
[Arianism](Arianism "Arianism") held that the Son was a created
being, inferior in nature to the Father, the church fathers
believed that the Son was subordinate in function within the
Godhead, but not in any way inferior in nature, being God of very
God.


## See also

-   [Eternal generation of the Son](Eternal_generation_of_the_Son "Eternal generation of the Son")

## Notes

1.  [↑](#ref-0) R C Kroeger and C C Kroeger,
    *Elwell Evangelical Dictionary*, s.v. Subordinationism.



