First Corinthians chapter five deals with the problem of a man in
the Corith church living in sin. Paul in this chapter speaks about
the need for church discipline, the method of church discipline,
the reason for church discipline, and the sphere of church
disciple.

## Contents

-   [1 The need for church discipline](#The_need_for_church_discipline)
-   [2 The method of church discipline](#The_method_of_church_discipline)
-   [3 The reason for church discipline](#The_reason_for_church_discipline)
-   [4 The sphere of church discipline](#The_sphere_of_church_discipline)
-   [5 Bibliography](#Bibliography)
-   [6 See also](#See_also)

## The need for church discipline

**1 It is actually reported that there is sexual immorality among you, and of a kind that is not tolerated even among pagans, for a man has his father's wife. 2 And you are arrogant! Ought you not rather to mourn? (ESV)**

It was reported to Paul that there was a man in the Corinth Church
body that was committing sexual immorality with his father's wife.
This does not mean this was his mother, but was most likely his
step mother. She may have been very attractive and his own age for
all we know. Yet everyone knew this was wrong and everyone knew
that it was happening. He knew he was sinning by committing this on
going act of sexual immorality.

"First, the present tense **has** indicates that the sinful
activity had been going on for some time and was still going on."
[1] Paul is not signaling out sexual immorality over other kinds of
sins. He is wanting to deal with on going sin or living in sin no
matter what the sin is. If allowed to continue this could destroy
the man spiritually and church’s reputation. This sin would have
been driving this man further & further away from Jesus Christ. His
conscience was being seared, his prayer life evaporating, his
witness being destroyed. Thus his sin needed to be dealt with. His
sin was so bad it was not even condoned by non-Christians.

In stead of dealing with this man's sin the Corinth church was
proud that they allowed this man to be part of their church. They
had the liberal attitude of the city of Corinth when it came to
sin. They were proud of the fact that they were tolerant of other
people. But these were the worldly attitudes of the city of Corinth
and not the way of the Lord. Today the church often takes on these
same attitudes when it comes to sin in the church. The church often
allows things like sexual immorality, materialism, gossip, temper,
drinking problems & other things to exist in it's midst. Christians
are to accept all people into the church but it should not tolerate
sin. Thus Paul called on the Corinthians to mourn over the man’s
sin. Sin is something that should cause Christians to mourn.

## The method of church discipline

Paul now moves from the need to discipline to the method of
discipline in the church. What should be done with the person
living in sin.

**2 Let him who has done this be removed from among you. (ESV)**

Paul tells the Corinthian Christians to remove this man from their
church. There was to be no more waiting to see if the man changed.
By the time Paul heard of the matter this situation would have been
happening for some time. It was a serious issue that needed to be
dealt with. To allow the man to continue in the church fellowship
would have sent the wrong message to everyone. To the man it would
be saying that it was OK for him to live in his sin. To the church
body it would be saying that sin can be tolerated, it not that bad.
To the world it would be saying that Christians are no different
than the rest of society and you could live a sinful life and still
be a Christian. By removing the person who chooses to live a sinful
life the church would be taking a stand for holiness and
righteousness in a sinful world. By removing the person who chooses
to live a sinful life the church would be saying that sin was
harmful and wrong. Removing the man may have seemed harsh but it
was the most loving thing the church could done.

**3 For though absent in body, I am present in spirit; and as if present, I have already pronounced judgment on the one who did such a thing. (ESV)**

The next thing Paul says is that even though he's was not there in
Corinth he had already pronounced judgment on the this man. The
verb “pronounced judgment” (kekrika) shows that Paul had reached an
unalterable decision about the offender. The facts reported to him
provided sufficient evidence upon which to base a firm verdict.
Paul was not basing his judgment of the man on rumor but known
facts. Church discipline of people is to be based on known facts
and never just rumors of what others have said. Often the church
and church leaders do not want to deal with church discipline. But
where there are known facts about a Christians on going sin they
must be dealt with. Not in a jugding way, but in way that shows the
person love and concern. The church should not back way from
dealing with matters of church discipline.

**4 When you are assembled in the name of the Lord Jesus and my spirit is present, with the power of our Lord Jesus, (ESV)**

Paul wanted the whole church to come together & agree in the
discipline of this member. If they could not agree it would likely
result in more divisions within the fellowship. (1 Corinthians
1:10-17) Plus there would be great authority if the church was
together in the course of spiritual disciple for this man. This
authority to discipline came from Paul the church leader. This
authority to discipline also came from Jesus Christ. Jesus had
already said what was to be done if our brother is sinning in
Matthew 18:15-20. In Matthew 18:18-20 Jesus gives the authority for
the church to discipline in His name. Thus the local church not
only has the divinely given right to discipline sinning members,
but it is commanded to do so (Titus 3:10).

**5 you are to deliver this man to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, so that his spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord. (ESV)**

Paul wanted this man deliver to Satan so that his sinful flesh may
be destroyed and he his be saved in the day of the Lord. Such
deliverance does not involve a consignment to Hades (Lk. 16:23) or
the lake of fire Rev. 20:14-15). The passage does not say the man
would lose his salvation. Outside the church is the world, the
sphere of Satan’s dominion (Eph. 2:1-2; Col. 1:13). It is in that
realm that Paul wanted to see the sinning Christian disciplined.
Paul is calling for excommunication and withdraw from all church
fellowship. In all of this Paul’s aim was help the sinning member
of the body. Without the help of the church the man would struggle
on his own. Thus hopefully coming to an end of himself and see his
need to repent and return to Christ. Paul wanted this man to come
to an end of self like the prodigal son in Luke 15. Paul wanted
this man’s flesh destroyed. Not is physical body but his sinful
desires. Than he could be restored back into fellowship. This is
what seems to have taken place with this man. (2 Corinthians
2:5-11)

## The reason for church discipline

Paul now moves on to why they were to disciple this man. Paul's
main concern here was for the church, which he desired to protect
from corruption and sin. The church should have recognized that its
toleration of such public sin transgressed its holy calling. How
were they to be the Church of Jesus Christ and at the same time let
sin be what they were known for in the community?

**6 Your boasting is not good. Do you not know that a little leaven leavens the whole lump? (ESV)'**

Paul uses leaven as an illustration of sins effect on the church.
In Scripture leaven is used as an illustration of influence.
Usually it refers to the influence of evil, though in Matthew 13:33
it represents the good influence of the kingdom of heaven. In this
case, however, evil influence is in view. The whole lump of dough
is here the local church. If given opportunity, sin will permeate a
whole church just as leaven permeates a whole loaf. Sin's nature is
to ferment, corrupt, and spread. In a more modern figure he was
saying, "Don't you know that one rotten apple can spoil the whole
barrel?" King Solomon had some choice words on how sin ruins good
things. "Dead flies make the perfumer's ointment give off a stench;
so a little folly outweighs wisdom and honor." (Ecc. 10:1) To allow
sin to continue in the church would ruin the fragrant aroma the
church was to give to the community.

This man's sin would effect the church in at lease two ways. 1. It
would destroy the churches testimony and witness to their
community. 2. It would cause sin to slowly grow throughout the
fellowship. Why bought about sin when no else in church seems to
take it seriously. Sin is a spiritual malignancy and it will not
long stay isolated. Unless removed it will spread its infection
until the whole fellowship of believers is diseased.Their boasting
about their tolerance of people's sin was only leading to their own
destruction.

**7 Cleanse out the old leaven that you may be a new lump, as you really are unleavened. (ESV)**

The church is to be a new batch or lump of dough without infectious
impurity. As Paul pointed out, the church really is a pure,
wholesome community of believers because it exists in Christ.
Christ has made the His Church holy and righteous by His work on
the Cross. We are saints and therefore ought live like saints,
those set apart for the Lord and holy living. The problem with
leaving this man living in sin remain in fellowship met church
became no different than the world. To be holy and honoring to the
Lord the church must be different from the sinful world in which we
live.Paul's command might be summarized, "You are pure, so start
acting like it."

**7 For Christ, our Passover lamb, has been sacrificed. 8 Let us therefore celebrate the festival, not with the old leaven, the leaven of malice and evil, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. (ESV)**

The reason for removing the old leaven of the immoral person from
the church is rooted in the significance of Christ's death. Christ
not only died during the Passover observance, but He was God's
Passover lamb who took away the sin of the world. His
substitutionary death removed our sin and imputed to us His
righteousness. However, to enjoy that new relationship in daily
fellowship known sin must not be tolerated, but must be confessed
and forsaken. The Old Testament Passover was celebrated but once a
year, as a reminder of the deliverance from Egypt. We are called to
celebrate our Passover in Christ not with an annual feast but with
constant life devotion to purity and rejection of sin. "Malice
speaks of an evil nature or disposition. Wickedness is the act that
manifests that evil disposition. We should daily give thanks to the
Lord for delivering us from sin in sincerity and truth."[1]

## The sphere of church discipline

Lasting Paul talks about the sphere of church disciple. In other
words who's sin the church is called to deal with.

**9 I wrote to you in my letter not to associate with sexually immoral people— 10 not at all meaning the sexually immoral of this world, or the greedy and swindlers, or idolaters, since then you would need to go out of the world. (ESV)**

Paul here clarifies one aspect of his instructions that may have
been misunderstood. Paul had written a previous letter to the
Corinthian Christians instructing them not to associate with
sexually immoral people. By this Paul wants to make it clear he is
talking about people in the church that are living sinful lives. As
Christians we live in a sinful world. Immorality happens all around
each day. Since Christians must minister to the world, they must
not separate themselves from all who are greedy and swindlers, or
idolaters. These people are the church's mission field (Matt.
9:10-13). Paul did not want the Corinthian believers to associate
with a person claiming to be a Christian yet was still living in
sin. Associate means "to mix up with or to mix together with. It
signifies to have, or keep, company with". [2] Christians are not
to keep company with another Christian living in sin.

This seems very hard indeed. So how do we apply this to those
undergoing church discipline? Faithful believers are not to keep
close company with any fellow believers who persistently practice
serious sins such as those mentioned here. The pain of such
isolation may drive the person to repentance. No church is healthy
enough to resist contamination from persistent sin in its midst,
any more than the healthiest and most nutritious bushel of apples
can withstand contamination from even a single bad one. As Paul was
to write in this same letter, "Bad company corrupts good character"
(1 Corinthians 15:33). The only solution in both cases is
separation. This is hard but it is what Paul is saying should be
done.

**11 But now I am writing to you not to associate with anyone who bears the name of brother if he is guilty of sexual immorality or greed, or is an idolater, reviler, drunkard, or swindler—not even to eat with such a one. (ESV)**

It was not just sexual immorality that Paul was concerned about.
Paul wanted to make sure that no kind of sin would be allowed to go
unchecked within the church fellowship. You have sins of the flesh
and sins of the spirit here in this list. The Greek terms used here
to identify the sins indicate patterns of behavior. The church both
corporately and individually, is "not even to eat" with the
Christians practicing sin. This refers to both the observance of
the Lord's Table and the sharing of meals in the home. Although
Christ ate with tax collectors and sinners, He did not acknowledge
them as His followers nor did He condone their sins. Paul wanted
the church to withdraw from these sinning Christians in any social
setting that implied acceptance.

**12 For what have I to do with judging outsiders? Is it not those inside the church whom you are to judge? 13 God judges those outside. "Purge the evil person from among you." (ESV)**

Paul concluded by saying that he and Corinthians had no right to
judge anyone outside the church. Such people never claimed to be
part of the church in the first place. When it comes to their sin
God Himself would judge them. When it comes to Christians that
belong to the church body it is another story. Those in the church
submit themselves to the authority of the body of Christ. Even
though it may be hard and we want to avoid it we must take action
when those in the church break the laws of Christ. We are called to
purge the evil person from among us. This kind of judgment is not
to be mean to the offender but to safeguard the spiritual witness
and health of the Church.

The Corinthians had taken pride in their tolerance of a serious
violation of Christian morality. In response, Paul insisted that
the unpleasant task of church discipline was necessary. The purity
of the church was at stake; the eternal soul of the sinner was at
stake. For these reasons, excommunication was essential.

## Bibliography

\1. John MacArthur, *MacArthur New Testament Commentary* – 1
 Corinthians, (Chicago: Moody Press, 1984), WORDsearch CROSS e-book,
 Under: "13. Immorality in the Church (5:1-13)".

\2. William E. Vine, Vine's Expository Dictionary of Old Testament
 and New Testament Words, (Nashville, TN: Thomas Nelson, 1940),
 WORDsearch CROSS e-book, Under: "Company".

## See also

-   [1 Corinthians](1_Corinthians "1 Corinthians")
-   [Church discipline](Church_discipline "Church discipline")



