## Verse 29

First Corinthians 15:29 remains an enigma, although over thirty
"explanations" have been suggested. Substituting alternative
phrases "baptism for the spiritually dead," "the dying," "in memory
of the departed," or others merely multiplies problems. Vicarious
baptisms for the benefit of the dead, practiced on the fringe of
Christianity from the second century, illustrate the influence of
this verse, but not Paul's meaning. [Paul](Paul "Paul") is arguing
that if [Jesus](Jesus "Jesus") has not risen, then Christian faith,
preaching, remission, hope, are all vain; so is "baptism for the
dead." He cannot mean Christian baptism, for none of its conditions
or benefits, as Paul expounds them, can be affirmed of the dead.
Besides, the following phrase ("And as for us" [NIV](NIV "NIV");
"And we ourselves" NEB) dissociates Paul and his colleagues from
the practice.

If [docetic](Docetism "Docetism") type Christians infected the
church at Corinth, they may have accepted baptism for departed
souls: but how would that prove bodily resurrection? Similarly,
some Dionysian rites and some practices of the mystery religions
were held to ensure access, and safe journeying, in the spiritual
world, even for those already dead. And Paul could argue from pagan
parallels without immediately condemning them (see, e.g., 1 Cor
10:20-22). But this analogy again does not necessarily imply bodily
[resurrection](Resurrection "Resurrection").

Yet even as a [Pharisee](Pharisees "Pharisees") Paul could not
conceive a disembodied immortality, leaving the surviving
personality incomplete (see 2 Cor 5:1-4). Is he then arguing that
even pagans, if their baptism for the dead be properly understood,
testify unconsciously to a bodily resurrection?
[[1]](http://bible.crosswalk.com/Dictionaries/BakersEvangelicalDictionary/bed.cgi?number=T75)



