The **Five articles of Remonstrance** refers to the document drawn
up in 1610 by the followers of
[Jacobus Arminius](Jacobus_Arminius "Jacobus Arminius")
(1560-1609). A "remonstrance" is literally "an expression of
opposition or protest," which in this case was a protest against
the Calvinist doctrine of predestination contained in the
[Belgic Confession](Belgic_Confession "Belgic Confession").
Consequently, those followers of Arminius who drafted this protest
were given the name "Remonstrants."

This document was condemned as heresy by the reformed churches at
the [Synod of Dort](Synod_of_Dort "Synod of Dort"), 1618-1619.
[[1]](http://www.apuritansmind.com/Creeds/ArminianArticles.htm)

## Article 1

That God, by an eternal and unchangeable purpose in Jesus Christ
his Son, before the foundation of the world, hath determined, out
of the fallen, sinful race of men, to save in Christ, for Christ’s
sake, and through Christ, those who, through the grace of the Holy
Ghost, shall believe on this his son Jesus, and shall persevere in
this faith and obedience of faith, through this grace, even to the
end; and, on the other hand, to leave the incorrigible and
unbelieving in sin and under wrath, and to condemn them as alienate
from Christ, according to the word of the Gospel in John 3:36: “He
that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life: and he that
believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God
abideth on him,” and according to other passages of Scripture also.
[[2]](http://www.apuritansmind.com/Creeds/ArminianArticles.htm)

## Article 2

That agreeably thereunto, Jesus Christ the Savior of the world,
died for all men and for every man, so that he has obtained for
them all, by his death on the cross, redemption and the forgiveness
of sins; yet that no one actually enjoys this forgiveness of sins
except the believer, according to the word of the Gospel of John
3:16, “For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life.” And in the First Epistle of 1 John 2:2: “And he
is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours only, but also
for the sins of the whole world.”
[[3]](http://www.apuritansmind.com/Creeds/ArminianArticles.htm)

## Article 3

That man has not saving grace of himself, nor of the energy of his
free will, inasmuch as he, in the state of apostasy and sin, can of
and by himself neither think, will, nor do any thing that is truly
good (such as saving faith eminently is); but that it is needful
that he be born again of God in Christ, through his Holy Spirit,
and renewed in understanding, inclination, or will, and all his
powers, in order that he may rightly understand, think, will, and
effect what is truly good, according to the Word of Christ, John
15:5, “Without me ye can do nothing.”
[[4]](http://www.apuritansmind.com/Creeds/ArminianArticles.htm)

## Article 4

That this grace of God is the beginning, continuance, and
accomplishment of all good, even to this extent, that the
regenerate man himself, without prevenient or assisting, awakening,
following and cooperative grace, can nei­ther think, will, nor do
good, nor withstand any temptations to evil; so that all good deeds
or movements, that can be conceived, must be ascribed to the grace
of God in Christ. but respects the mode of the operation of this
grace, it is not irresistible; inas­much as it is written
con­cerning many, that they have resisted the Holy Ghost. Acts 7,
and else­where in many places.
[[5]](http://www.apuritansmind.com/Creeds/ArminianArticles.htm)

## Article 5

That those who are in­corporated into Christ by true faith, and
have thereby become partakers of his life-giving Spirit, have
thereby full power to strive against Satan, sin, the world, and
their own flesh, and to win the victory; it being well un­derstood
that it is ever through the assisting grace of the Holy Ghost; and
that Jesus Christ assists them through his Spirit in all
temptations, extends to them his hand, and if only they are ready
for the conflict, and desire his help, and are not inactive, keeps
them from falling, so that they, by no craft or power of Satan, can
be misled nor plucked out of Christ’s hands, according to the Word
of Christ, John 10:28: “Neither shall any man pluck them out of my
hand.” But whether they are capable, through negligence, of
forsaking again the first beginning of their life in Christ, of
again returning to this present evil world, of turning away from
the holy doctrine which was deliv­ered them, of losing a good
conscience, of be­coming devoid of grace, that must be more
particularly determined out of the Holy Scripture, be­fore we
ourselves can teach it with the full persuasion of our mind.
[[6]](http://www.apuritansmind.com/Creeds/ArminianArticles.htm)

## Resources

-   Phillip Schaff, *The Creeds of Christendom*, Volume 3, Baker
    Books, Grand Rapids, MI: 1996. Pages 545ff.

## See Also

-   [Arminianism](Arminianism "Arminianism")
-   [Jacobus Arminius](Jacobus_Arminius "Jacobus Arminius")
-   [Synod of Dort](Synod_of_Dort "Synod of Dort")
-   [TULIP](TULIP "TULIP") (in contrast to the above Five
    Articles)

## External Links

-   [The Five Articles of the Remonstrants](http://www.cresourcei.org/creedremonstrants.html),
    by Dennis Bratcher (ed.)
-   [Divine Election and Reprobation / Five Articles of the Remonstrants](http://spindleworks.com/library/bouwman/canon/ch1art1-5.htm)



