**Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche** (October 15, 1844 – August 25,
1900) was a profoundly influential German philosopher,
psychologist, and classical philologist. Particularly aggressive,
he was a severe critic of Christian morality, Utilitarianism,
contemporary philosophy, materialism, German idealism, German
romanticism, and of modernity in general. He is among the most
readable philosophers and penned a large number of aphorisms and
varied experimental forms of composition. Although his work was
distorted and thus identified with Philosophical Romanticism,
Nihilism, Anti-semitism, and even Nazism, he himself vociferously
denied such tendencies in his work, so much as to directly opposing
them. In philosophy and literature, he is often identified as an
inspiration for [existentialism](Existentialism "Existentialism")
and [postmodernism](Postmodernism "Postmodernism"). His thought is,
on many accounts, most difficult to comprehend in any systemized
form and remains a vivacious topic for debate.

## Multimedia

-   Renewing Your Mind: "Nietzsche"
    ([Real](http://riven.ligonier.org/playlists/rym20041123.m3u)

## Contents

-   [1 His Works and Ideas](#His_Works_and_Ideas)
    -   [1.1 Religion](#Religion)

-   [2 Quotes](#Quotes)

## His Works and Ideas

Nietzsche is famous for:

-   his embrace of a sort of a-rationalism which found expression
    in the idea he called "the Will to Power" (*der Wille zur Macht*);
-   his rejection of morality, in which he felt partly reflected
    the inverse of the "will to power" and a perversion of useful
    altruism;
-   his attacks on [Christianity](Christianity "Christianity"): the
    most well-known and frequently misunderstood occurs with the phrase
    "god is dead" from a passage in *The Gay Science* titled "The
    Madman", and similarly is *The Antichrist*;
-   his belief that Christianity planted the seeds of its own
    eventual demise: Christian notions of truth and the absolute paved
    the way for [rationalism](Rationalism "Rationalism"), the
    [Enlightenment](Age_of_Enlightenment "Age of Enlightenment") and
    the scientific method, which make blind faith unthinkable for any
    educated person. Since
    [Martin Luther](Martin_Luther "Martin Luther") and Kant, continuing
    through the enlightenment, analytical and secular thinking had, he
    said, significantly replaced Christian theology as a social force
    and hence the statement "God is dead";
-   his origination of the *Übermensch* concept: translated as
    "overman", sometimes as "superman", which finally means "over-man"
    or "through-man" or, in German, "Hindurch-Mensch". There is no
    adequate English translation, and so each option also doubles as an
    interpretation of what Nietzsche meant by it. German *über* is
    identical with the Latin *super*;
-   his important early concept of "free spirit" that began in
    *Human, All-Too-Human*, which may be a starting point for the
    *Übermensch* concept;
-   his writings on the Eternal Recurrence, while he maintained a
    philosophical animosity toward its "paralyzing" and nihilistic
    nature, as a touchstone for the highest possible affirmation of
    life, of which his *Zarathustra* embodies.

### Religion

In *The Antichrist*, Nietzsche attacked Christian pedagogy for what
he called its "transvaluation" of healthy instinctive values. He
went beyond agnostic and atheistic thinkers of the Enlightenment,
who felt that Christianity was simply untrue. He claimed that it
may have been deliberately propagated as a subversive religion (a
"psychological warfare weapon" or what some would call a "memetic
virus") within the Roman Empire by the Apostle Paul as a form of
covert revenge for the Roman destruction of Jerusalem and the
Temple during the Jewish War. However, in *The Anti-Christ*,
Nietzsche has a remarkably high view of Jesus, claiming the
scholars of the day fail to pay any attention to the man, Jesus,
and only look to their construction, Christ. Nietzsche made the
cryptic claim that "there was only one true Christian, and he died
on the cross." According to the American writer H.L. Mencken,
Nietzsche felt that the religion of the ancient Greeks of the
heroic and classical era was superior to Christianity because it
portrayed strong, heroic, and smart men as role models and did not
try to demonize healthy natural desires such as eroticism, thirst
for revenge, creativity and independence from social mores.
According to at least one authority, the Slovenian scholar Anton
Strle, Nietzsche lost his faith in the time he was reading the book
*Leben Jesu* (*Life of Jesus*), written by the German theologian
David Strauss.

## Quotes

-   "After Buddha was dead, his shadow was still shown for
    centuries in a cave - a tremendous, gruesome shadow. God is dead;
    but given the way of men, there may still be caves for thousands of
    years in which his shadow will be shown. -And we- we still have to
    vanquish his shadow, too." from Nietzsche's *The Gay Science*,
    s.108.

-   "Christianity was from the beginning, essentially and
    fundamentally, life's nausea and disgust with life, merely
    concealed behind, masked by, dressed up as, faith in 'another' or
    'better' life." from Nietzsche's *The Birth of Tragedy*, p.23.



