**Nestorianism** is basically the doctrine that
[Jesus](Jesus "Jesus") existed as two persons, the man Jesus and
the divine Son of God, rather than as a unified person. This
doctrine is identified with [Nestorius](Nestorius "Nestorius")
(c.386-451), Patriarch of Constantinople, although he himself
denied holding this belief. This view of Christ was condemned at
the [Council of Ephesus](Council_of_Ephesus "Council of Ephesus")
in 431, and the conflict over this view led to the Nestorian
schism, separating the Assyrian Church of the East from the
Byzantine Church.

The motivation for this view was an aversion to the idea that "God"
suffered and died on the cross, be it the divinity itself, the
[Trinity](Trinity "Trinity"), or one of the persons of the Trinity.
Thus, they would say, Jesus the perfect man suffered and died, not
the divine second person of the Trinity, for such is an impossible
thought -- hence the inference that two "persons" essentially
inhabited the one body of Jesus. Nestorius himself argued against
calling [Mary](Mary "Mary") the "Mother of God" (*Theotokos*) as
the church was beginning to do. He held that Mary was the mother of
Christ only in respect to His humanity. The council at Ephesus
(431) accused Nestorius of the heresy of teaching "two persons" in
Christ and insisted that *Theotokos* was an appropriate title for
Mary.

The problem with Nestorianism is that it threatens the
[atonement](Atonement "Atonement"). If Jesus is two persons, then
which one died on the cross? If it was the "human person" then the
atonement is not of divine quality and thereby insufficient to
cleanse us of our sins.
[[1]](http://www.carm.org/heresy/nestorianism.htm)

## See also

-   [Nestorius](Nestorius "Nestorius")
-   [Arianism](Arianism "Arianism")

## External links

-   [Nestorianism](http://www.theologyforums.com/definitions/Nestorianism/)
    (basictheology.com)



