The **New Wineskins Association of Churches** is comprised of over
120 evangelical churches, currently within the Presbyterian Church
(USA). This network of churches was formed as a result of growing
discontent among evangelical church pastors, elders, and members
regarding the general direction of the PCUSA.

At this point the NWAC is not yet a seperate denomination, but
speculation among experts suggests that the NWAC may soon consider
departing from the PCUSA for several reasons including but not
limited to: 1) general discontent with the PCUSA's desire to stray
away from a biblical stance on issues such as homosexuality and
abortion 2) growing dissatisfaction with the PCUSA's apparent
inability and/or desire to inforce its own constitution and 3) the
recent reception of documents such as the PUP (Peace, Unity, and
Purity) Report at the 2006 General Assembly which created a
constitutional loop-hole for homosexuals to become ordained by a
sort of "local opion" which allows them to declare a scruple
against the stated constitution. Another recent document that was
received by the General Assembly was the "Trinity Report" which
suggested that the terms "Father, Son, and Holy Spirit" may be
outmoded. The NWAC considers both of these documents to be in error
is at least several places.

Such declarations which trend towards a departure from the PCUSA's
historic grounding in biblical theolgy and its own reformed
confessions has undoubtedly prompted many evangelical churches to
align with a new vision for what it means to be a reformed,
evangelical presbyterian in the 21st century. The New Wineskins
Association of Churches has already crafted a constitution that
emphasises local church ministy as opposed to denominational
heirarchy, and consists of specific theological essentials of the
reformed faith as well as ethical imperatives. The NWAC will be
holding its third convocation in February of 2007 and there will
consider its future relationship with its parent denomination the
PCUSA.



