**Nicholas (Nicky) Glyn Paul Gumbel** (born April 28, 1955 in
London) is an [Anglican](Anglican "Anglican") priest and author. He
is most famous as the developer of the Alpha course
[[1]](http://alpha.org/), a basic introduction to
[Christianity](Christianity "Christianity").

Gumbel took an MA at Trinity College, Cambridge in 1976. In 1983 he
began studies at Wycliffe Hall, Oxford. A former barrister, Gumbel
joined the staff of Holy Trinity Brompton Church in London as a
curate is 1986. He was ordained priest in 1987. In 1990 he took
over the running of the Alpha Course that had been running there
since 1973.

Gumbel was officially installed as Vicar of Holy Trinity Brompton
Church in September 2005 after the Reverend Prebendary Sandy Millar
retired from stipendiary ministry but moved on to be Priest in
Charge of St Mark's Tollington Park, in North London.

Gumbel is the author of a number of books related to the Alpha
course, including Questions of Life, which has sold over 750,000
copies, was voted "Christian Book of the Year" in 1994 and has been
published in 48 languages.

He has recently (2006) taught a sermon on the Da Vinci Code using
historical documents e.g how gnostic texts of Phillip quote the New
Testament and therefore, contrary to Dan Brown, cannot be earlier.
[[2]](http://video.google.com/videoplay?docid=-6957514137139557953&q=da+vinci+code)

## External links

Articles critiquing Nicky Gumbel, the Toronto Blessing and the
Alpha course:

-   [http://www.christian-witness.org/archives/van1997/alpha1\_97.html](http://www.christian-witness.org/archives/van1997/alpha1_97.html)
-   [http://www.christian-witness.org/archives/van1998/alpha2\_98.html](http://www.christian-witness.org/archives/van1998/alpha2_98.html)



