[![image](images/thumb/0/09/Noah.jpg/180px-Noah.jpg)](http://www.theopedia.com/File:Noah.jpg)
[![image](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAA8AAAALCAAAAACFLIiAAAAAAnRSTlMA/1uRIrUAAABPSURBVAjXY/j///+5vXDwjAHIr26ZAgXZe8H8a/+hoIcw/9nevdVL9+79DuPvzQYZFPUezu8BMZLXgkExnD8HAu6hqv//n+HZVjD4DuUDAKlChD3fj6aPAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)](http://www.theopedia.com/File:Noah.jpg "Enlarge")
Noah on the Ark
**Noah** (from the Hebrew meaning *Rest*), son of Lamech, was the
tenth and last of the antediluvian Patriarchs and father of Ham,
Shem, and Japheth. Noah is probably best known for the
[Genesis Flood](Genesis_Flood "Genesis Flood") which came in his
time. His story is contained in the book of Genesis, chapters 5
through 9.

While the Flood and [Noah's Ark](Noah's_Ark "Noah's Ark") are the
best-known elements of the story of Noah, he is also mentioned as
the "first husbandman" and the inventor of wine, as well as in
connection with the somewhat mysterious episode of his drunkenness
and the subsequent Curse of Ham.

Noah died 350 years after the Flood, at the age of 950 according to
Genesis 9:28-29.

## God's covenant with Noah

After the flood, Noah built an altar to God (the first altar
mentioned in the Bible) and made an offering. "And when the LORD
smelled the pleasing aroma, the LORD said in his heart, 'I will
never again curse the ground because of man, for the intention of
man's heart is evil from his youth. Neither will I ever again
strike down every living creature as I have done. While the earth
remains, seedtime and harvest, cold and heat, summer and winter,
day and night, shall not cease.'" Genesis 8:21-22
([ESV](ESV "ESV"))

Then God made a [covenant](Noahic_Covenant "Noahic Covenant"): Noah
and his descendants would henceforth be free to eat meat ("Every
moving thing that lives shall be food for you. And as I gave you
the green plants, I give you everything"), and the animals would
fear man; and in return, man would be forbidden to eat "flesh with
its life, that is, its blood." And God forbade murder, and gave a
commandment: "Be fruitful and multiply, teem on the earth and
multiply in it." And as a sign of His covenant, He set the rainbow
in the sky, "the sign of the covenant that I have established
between me and all flesh that is on the earth." Genesis 9:1-17
([ESV](ESV "ESV"))

## See Also

-   [Covenant](Covenant "Covenant")



