*The Marrow of Modern Divinity* has been one of the most
influential books in the history of the
[Church in Scotland](Church_in_Scotland "Church in Scotland"). It
was written by E. F. usually attributed to Edward Fisher and is a
book about the relationship between the law and the gospel.

**Multimedia**

-   [The Free Offer and The Marrow Controversy](http://www.falkirkfreechurch.com/sermons#FreeOffer)
    (MP3), by Sinclair B. Ferguson and others

*The Marrow* was first published in England in the 1640s but was
largely forgotten until it was republished about 70 years later by
James Hog on the recommendation of
[Thomas Boston](Thomas_Boston "Thomas Boston"). Boston, a country
preacher, found a copy of the book in his parish and delighted in
the teaching of the gospel which the Marrow proclaimed. However the
volume was banned by the Church of Scotland General Assembly in
1720. The Assembly condemned the view that the assurance was of the
essence of faith. It accused the Marrow of antinomianism and of
teaching universal redemption. The Marrow above all taught a full,
free and universal offer of the [gospel](Gospel "Gospel") â€“ that
there is good news for everyone without exception.

Twelve *Marrowmen* including Thomas Boston and Ralph and Ebenezer
Erskine opposed its ban at the assembly of 1721, claiming that
teachings which the Assembly had condemned were both scriptural and
confessional. Moreover they said the book was being misrepresented
and that its sayings were being taken out of context. Nevertheless
the Marrow was again condemned and its supporters were publicly
rebuked by the Assembly in 1722.

A new edition of the Marrow was published in 1726 along with Thomas
Boston's voluminous notes and has been reprinted frequently, the
latest edition being published in 2010.

## External links

-   [The Marrow of Modern Divinity](http://www.reformation21.org/shelf-life/the-marrow-of-modern-divinity.php),
    by Phil Ryken (Reformation 21)



