[![image](images/thumb/5/52/Bucer.jpg/180px-Bucer.jpg)](http://www.theopedia.com/File:Bucer.jpg)
[![image](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAA8AAAALCAAAAACFLIiAAAAAAnRSTlMA/1uRIrUAAABPSURBVAjXY/j///+5vXDwjAHIr26ZAgXZe8H8a/+hoIcw/9nevdVL9+79DuPvzQYZFPUezu8BMZLXgkExnD8HAu6hqv//n+HZVjD4DuUDAKlChD3fj6aPAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)](http://www.theopedia.com/File:Bucer.jpg "Enlarge")
Martin Bucer
**Martin Bucer** (November 11, 1491 – February 28, 1551) was a
German [Protestant](Protestant "Protestant") reformer.

Bucer was born at Schlettstadt in Alsace (today Sélestat, in
France). In 1506 he entered the Dominican order, and was sent to
study at Heidelberg. There he became acquainted with the works of
[Erasmus](Erasmus "Erasmus") and
[Luther](Martin_Luther "Martin Luther"), and was present at a
disputation of the latter with some of the Romanist doctors. He
became a convert to the reformed opinions, abandoned his order by
papal dispensation in 1521, and soon afterwards married a nun,
Elisabeth Silbereisen.

In 1522 he was pastor at Landstuhl in the palatinate, and travelled
hither and thither propagating the reformed doctrine. After his
excommunication in 1523 he made his headquarters at Strassburg,
where he succeeded Matthew Zell. Henry VIII of England asked his
advice in connection with the divorce from Catherine of Aragon.

After the death of his first wife he married 1542 Wibrandis
Rosenblatt the widow of the reformers
[Johannes Oecolampadius](Johannes_Oecolampadius "Johannes Oecolampadius")
and Wolfgang Fabricius Capito.

On the question of the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, Bucer's
opinions were decidedly
[Zwinglian](Huldreich_Zwingli "Huldreich Zwingli"), but he was
anxious to maintain church unity with the Lutheran party and
constantly endeavoured—especially after
[Zwingli's](Huldreich_Zwingli "Huldreich Zwingli") death—to
formulate a statement of belief that would unite Lutheran, south
German and Swiss reformers; hence, the charge of ambiguity and
obscurity which has been laid against him. After the failure of the
Marburg Colloquy of October, 1529 to bring about such a union,
Bucer himself persisted in seeking agreement with the Lutheran
reformers. Such an agreement, the Wittenberg Concord, was concluded
on May 29, 1536. The south German signatories were Bucer, Wolfgang
Fabricius Capito, Matthäus Alber, Martin Frecht, Jakob Otter, and
Wolfgang Musculus. The Lutheran signatories were
[Martin Luther](Martin_Luther "Martin Luther"),
[Philipp Melanchthon](Philipp_Melanchthon "Philipp Melanchthon"),
Johannes Bugenhagen, Justus Jonas, Caspar Cruciger, Justus Menius,
Friedrich Myconius, Urban Rhegius, George Spalatin. Later Bucer
disavowed the agreement due to his differences with the Lutherans
over the interpretation of *manducatio indignorum* (that "unworthy
communicants" also eat and drink the body and blood of Christ in
the [Eucharist](Eucharist "Eucharist")). Bucer held that such
"unworthy communicants" could only be Christians, though "unworthy"
due to impenitence. The Lutherans held that "unworthy" communicants
included unbelievers as well.

In 1548 he was sent for to Augsburg to sign the agreement, called
the Interim, between the Catholics and Protestants. His stout
opposition to this project exposed him to many difficulties, and he
was glad to accept Thomas Cranmer's invitation to make his home in
England. On his arrival in 1549 he was appointed Regius Professor
of Divinity at Cambridge. Edward VI and the protector Somerset
showed him much favour and he was consulted as to the revision of
the *Book of Common Prayer*. But on February 28, 1551 he died, and
was buried in the university church, with great state.

In 1557 Queen Mary's commissioners exhumed and burnt his body
(along with that of Paul Fagius) and demolished his tomb; it was
subsequently restored by order of Queen Elizabeth I. Bucer is said
to have written ninety-six treatises, among them a translation and
exposition of the Psalms and a work *De regno Christi*. His name is
familiar in English literature from the use made of his doctrines
by John Milton in his divorce treatises.

Bucer's collected writings are being published in three series: the
*Opera Latina* edited by Francois Wendel et al (1955-), the
*Deutsche Schriften* edited by Robert Stupperich et al (1960-), and
the correspondence, edited by Jean Rott et all (1979-). Many of his
biblical commentaries (among his most important writings) remain
without a modern edition. A volume known as the *Tomus Anglicanus*
(Basel, 1577) contains his works written in England. The most
recent biography is Martin Greschat,
*Martin Bucer: A Reformer and His Times,* trans. Stephen Buckwalter
(Munich, 1990; English trans. Louisville, Ky.: Westminster John
Knox, 2004). See also JW Baum, *Capito and Butzer* (Strassburg,
1860); A Erichson, *Martin Butzer* (1891); and the articles in the
*Dictionary of National Biography|Dict. Nat. Biog.* (by AW Ward),
and in Herzog-Hauck's *Realencyklopädie* (by Paul Grunberg).



-   *This article incorporates text from the Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition, a publication now in the public domain.*



