[![Broom icon.png](images/thumb/9/90/Broom_icon.png/30px-Broom_icon.png.pagespeed.ce.3MDzK_R-j-.png)](http://www.theopedia.com/File:Broom_icon.png)
**This article or section may require cleanup to meet Theopedia's *[quality standards](http://www.theopedia.com/Theopedia:Writing_guide "Theopedia:Writing guide")*.**  
Please discuss this issue on the
[talk page](http://www.theopedia.com/Talk:Mercy_of_God "Talk:Mercy of God")
or [replace this tag](index.php?title=Mercy_of_God&action=edit)
with a more specific message. Help:
[How to Contribute](http://www.theopedia.com/Help:How_to_contribute "Help:How to contribute").{{\#if:October
2005|  
This article/section has been tagged since **October 2005**.|}}
"O give thanks unto the Lord: for He is good, for His mercy
endureth forever" (Ps. 136:1). For this perfection of the Divine
character God is greatly to be praised. Three times over in as many
verses does the Psalmist here call upon the saints to give thanks
unto the Lord for this adorable attribute. And surely this is the
least that can be asked for from those who have been such bounteous
gainers by it. When we contemplate the characteristics of this
Divine excellency, we cannot do otherwise than bless God for it.
His mercy is "great" (1 Kings 3:6), "plenteous" (Ps. 86:5),
"tender" (Luke 1:78), "abundant" (1 Pet. 1:3); it is "from
everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear Him" (Ps. 103:17).
Well may we say with the Psalmist, "I will sing aloud of Thy mercy"
(59:16).

"I will make all My goodness pass before thee, and I will proclaim
the name of the Lord before thee; and will be gracious to whom I
will be gracious, and will show mercy on whom I will show mercy"
(Ex. 33:19). Wherein differs the "mercy of God from His grace"? The
mercy of God has its spring in the Divine goodness. The first issue
of God’s goodness is His benignity or bounty, by which He gives
liberally to His creatures as creatures; thus has He given being
and life to all things. The second issue of God’s goodness is His
mercy, which denotes the ready inclination of God to relieve the
misery of fallen creatures. Thus, "mercy" presupposes sin.

Though it may not be easy at the first consideration to perceive a
real difference between the grace and the mercy of God, it helps us
thereto if we carefully ponder His dealings with the unfallen
angels. He has never exercised mercy toward them, for they have
never stood in any need thereof, not having sinned or come beneath
the effects of the curse. Yet, they certainly are the objects of
God’s free and sovereign grace. First, because of His election of
them from out of the whole angelic race (I Tim. 5:21). Second, and
in consequence of their election, because of His preservation of
them from apostasy, when Satan rebelled and dragged down with him
one-third of the celestial hosts (Rev. 12:4). Third, in making
Christ their Head (Col. 2:10; 1 Pet. 3:22), whereby they are
eternally secured in the holy condition in which they were created.
Fourth, because of the exalted position which has been assigned
them: to live in God’s immediate presence (Dan. 7:10), to serve Him
constantly in His heavenly temple, to receive honorable commissions
from Him (Heb. 1:14). This is abundant grace toward them but
"mercy" it is not.

In endeavoring to study the mercy of God as it is set forth in
Scripture, a threefold distinction needs to be made, if the Word of
Truth is to be "rightly divided" thereon. First, there is a general
mercy of God, which is extended not only to all men, believers and
unbelievers alike, but also to the entire creation: "His tender
mercies are over all His works" (Ps. 145:9): "He giveth to all
life, and breath, and all things" (Acts 17:25). God has upon the
brute creation in their needs, and supplies them with suitable
provision. Second, there is a special mercy of God, which is
exercised toward the children of men, helping and succouring them,
notwithstanding their sins. To them also He communicates all the
necessities of life: "for He maketh His sun to rise on the evil and
on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust" (Matt.
5:45). Third, there is a sovereign mercy which is reserved for the
heirs of salvation, which is communicated to them in a covenant
way, through the Mediator.

Following out a little further the difference between the second
and third distinctions pointed out above, it is important to note
that the mercies which God bestows on the wicked are solely of a
temporal nature; that is to say, they are confined strictly to this
present life. There will be no mercy extended to them beyond the
grave: "It is a people of no understanding: therefore He that made
them will not have mercy on them, and He that formed them will show
them no favour" (Isa. 27:11). But at this point a difficulty may
suggest itself to some of our readers, namely, Does not Scripture
affirm that "His mercy endureth forever" (Ps. 136:1)? Two things
need to be pointed out in that connection. God can never cease to
be merciful, for this is a quality of the Divine essence (Ps.
116:5); but the exercise of His mercy is regulated by His sovereign
will. This must be so, for there is nothing outside Himself which
obliges Him to act; if there were, that "something" would be
supreme, and God would cease to be God.

It is pure sovereign grace which alone determines the exercise of
Divine mercy. God expressly affirms this fact in Romans 9:15, "For
He saith to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy." It
is not the wretchedness of the creature which causes Him to show
mercy, for God is not influenced by things outside of Himself as we
are. If God were influenced by the abject misery of leprous
sinners, He would cleanse and save all of them. But He does not.
Why? Simply because it is not His pleasure and purpose so to do.
Still less is it the merits of the creature which causes Him to
bestow mercies upon them, for it is a contradiction in terms to
speak of meriting "mercy." "Not by works of righteousness which we
have done, but according to His mercy He saved us" (Titus 3:5)—the
one standing in direct antithesis from the other. Nor is it the
merits of Christ which moves God to bestow mercies on His elect:
that would be putting the effect for the cause. It is "through" or
because of the tender mercy of our God that Christ was sent here to
His people (Luke 1:78). The merits of Christ make it possible for
God to righteously bestow spiritual mercies on His elect, justice
having been fully satisfied by the Surety! No, mercy arises solely
from God’s imperial pleasure.

Again; though it be true, blessedly and gloriously true, that God’s
mercy "endureth forever," yet we must observe carefully the objects
to whom His "mercy" is shown. Even the casting of the reprobate
into the Lake of Fire is an act of mercy. The punishment of the
wicked is to be contemplated from a threefold viewpoint. From God’s
side, it is an act of justice, vindicating His honour. The mercy of
God is never shown to the prejudice of His holiness and
righteousness. From their side, it is an act of equity, when they
are made to suffer the due reward of their iniquities. But from the
standpoint of the redeemed, the punishment of the wicked is an act
of unspeakable mercy. How dreadful would it be if the present order
of things when the children of God are obliged to live in the midst
of the children of the Devil, should continue forever! Heaven would
at once cease to be heaven if the ears of the saints still heard
the blasphemous and filthy language of the reprobate. What a mercy
that in the New Jerusalem "there shall in nowise enter into it any
thing that defileth, neither worketh abomination" (Rev. 21:27)!

Lest the reader might think that in the last paragraph we have been
drawing upon our imagination, let us appeal to Holy Scripture in
support of what has been said. In Psalm 143:12 we find David
praying, "And of Thy mercy cut off mine enemies, and destroy all
them that afflict my soul: for I am Thy servant." Again; in Psalm
136:15 we read that God "overthrew Pharaoh and his hosts in the Red
Sea: for His mercy endureth forever." It was an act of vengeance
upon Pharaoh and his hosts, but it was an act of "mercy" unto the
Israelites. Again, in Revelation 19:1-3 we read, "I heard a great
voice of much people in heaven, saying, Alleluia; Salvation, and
glory, and honour, and power, unto the Lord our God: for true and
righteous are His judgments: for He hath judged the great whore,
which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and hath avenged
the blood of His servants at her hand. And again they said,
Alleluia. And her smoke rose up forever and ever."

From what has just been before us, let us note how vain is the
presumptuous hope of the wicked, who, notwithstanding their
continued defiance of God, nevertheless count upon His being
merciful to them. How many there are who say, I do not believe that
God will ever cast me into Hell; He is too merciful. Such a hope is
a viper, which if cherished in their bosoms will sting them to
death. God is a God of justice as well as mercy, and He has
expressly declared that He will "by no means clear the guilty" (Ex.
34:7). Yea, He has said, "The wicked shall be turned into hell, all
the nations that forget God" (Ps. 9:17). As well might men reason:
I do not believe that if filth be allowed to accumulate and
sewerage become stagnant and people deprive themselves of fresh
air, that a merciful God will let them fall a prey to a deadly
fever. The fact is that those who neglect the laws of health are
carried away by disease, notwithstanding God’s mercy. Equally true
is it that those who neglect the laws of spiritual health shall
forever suffer the Second Death.

Unspeakably solemn is it to see so many abusing this Divine
perfection. They continue to despise God’s authority, trample upon
His laws continue in sin, and yet presume upon His mercy. But God
will not be unjust to Himself. God shows mercy to the truly
penitent, but not to the impenitent (Luke 13:3). To continue in sin
and yet reckon upon Divine mercy remitting punishment is
diabolical. It is saying, "Let us do evil that good may come," and
of all such it is written, whose "damnation is just" (Rom. 3:8).
Presumption shall most certainly be disappointed; read carefully
Deuteronomy 29:18-20. Christ is the spiritual Mercy-seat, and all
who despise and reject His Lordship shall "perish from the way,
when His wrath is kindled but a little" (Ps. 2:12).

But let our final thought be of God’s spiritual mercies unto His
own people. "Thy mercy is great unto the heavens" (Ps. 57:10). The
riches thereof transcend our loftiest thought. "For as the heaven
is high above the earth, so great is His mercy toward them that
fear Him" (Ps. 103:11). None can measure it. The elect are
designated "vessels of mercy" (Rom. 9:23). It is mercy that
quickened them when they were dead in sins (Eph. 2:4,5). It is
mercy that saves them (Titus 3:5). It is His abundant mercy which
begat them unto an eternal inheritance (1 Peter 1:3). Time would
fail us to tell of His preserving, sustaining, pardoning, supplying
mercy. Unto His own, God is "the Father of mercies" (2 Cor. 1:3).

"When all Thy mercies, O my God, My rising soul surveys,
Transported with the view I’m lost, In wonder, love, and praise."



