"**Mike Slaughter**, is lead pastor at Ginghamsburg Church (United
Methodist). His life-long passion to reach the lost and set the
oppressed free has now made him a tireless and leading advocate for
the children, women and men of Darfur, Sudan, named by the U.N. as
the worst humanitarian crisis in the world today.

"Under Mike’s leadership, Ginghamsburg Church has become known as
an early innovator of small group ministry, the Church “media
reformation” and cyberministry, with the Ginghamsburg web site
averaging 50,000 visits monthly from around the world. Since
initiating The Sudan Project in January 2005, Ginghamsburg has
invested $3.7 million into humanitarian relief in Darfur. The
resultant agricultural project, child development program and safe
water initiative are expanding to reach a quarter of a million
Sudanese refugees and villagers. Mike has twice visited the
internally displaced persons camps and villages in South Darfur
served through The Sudan Project to witness firsthand God’s “loaves
and fishes” miracle and to reconfirm for the Sudanese people
Ginghamsburg’s determined commitment toward completing the mission
that has been placed before it. Locally, the New Path outreach arm
of Ginghamsburg Church annually serves more than 40,000 people in
surrounding communities via its food pantry, car, clothing and
furniture ministries.

"In 2005 and 2006, Ginghamsburg was named as one of the top 50
churches in the U.S. by *The Church Report* magazine. In 2007, The
Church Report listed Mike as one of the top 50 most influential
Christians in America. As a mentor, Mike travels globally to speak
and uses his “gift of irritation” to equip ministry leaders to
minimize brick and maximize mission so that they may fully deploy
the mission of Jesus into the world. He is also the author of
multiple books^[[1]](#note-0)^ with the most recent being Upside
Living in a Downside Economy (Abingdon Press).

"Mike is an ordained Elder within the United Methodist Church (UMC)
and holds a Doctorate of Ministry. He was named the Foundation for
Evangelism’s “Distinguished Evangelist” in 2003 and has twice
received the Denman Evangelism Award from the Foundation in
recognition of demonstrated leadership in promoting the United
Methodist Church’s historic commitment to evangelism. In 2007,
Olivet Nazarene University granted Mike the Reed Institute Lifetime
Achievement Award, given in recognition of outstanding leadership."
^[[2]](#note-1)^

## Notes

1.  [↑](#ref-0) See
    [Michael Slaughter website](http://www.mikeslaughter.com/writing)
2.  [↑](#ref-1)
    [Ginghamsburg church](http://ginghamsburg.org/staff/?tx_wecstaffdirectory_pi1[curstaff]=1&cHash=27661582ae)



