The **Mosaic authorship of the Pentateuch** is a view that
understands [Moses](Moses "Moses") to be the main author of the
[Pentateuch](Pentateuch "Pentateuch") (i.e. the first five books of
the [Bible](Bible "Bible")). This belief has received criticism,
mostly in the last 200 years, yet remains supported by both
Scripture and early church tradition. The conclusion is not that
Moses wrote *all* of the Pentateuch, but that he had a major hand
in not only its writing and development, but even its composition
(i.e. how it was put together).


## Contents

-   [1 Support for Mosaic authorship](#Support_for_Mosaic_authorship)
    -   [1.1 Support from the Pentateuch](#Support_from_the_Pentateuch)
    -   [1.2 Support across the Bible](#Support_across_the_Bible)
    -   [1.3 Jewish and early Christian support](#Jewish_and_early_Christian_support)
    -   [1.4 Support from Jesus](#Support_from_Jesus)

-   [2 Did Moses write everything?](#Did_Moses_write_everything.3F)
-   [3 References](#References)
-   [4 See also](#See_also)
-   [5 External links](#External_links)

## Support for Mosaic authorship

### Support from the Pentateuch

Throughout the Pentateuch it becomes clear that Moses is recording
what happens. Exodus 24:4 states that "Moses then wrote down
everything the LORD had said" and that shortly thereafter he took
the "Book of the Covenant and read it to the people" (Ex 24:7).
Moses also wrote down the
[Ten Commandments](Ten_Commandments "Ten Commandments") (Ex
24:27-28). Other passages shed light on the fact that Moses kept
record of what was going on (Ex 17:14; Num 33:2), and there are
clear references that Moses was the author of
[Deuteronomy](Deuteronomy "Deuteronomy") (Deut 31:9, 19, 22, 24).
Less direct references can be found in Ex 25:16, 21-22; Deut 28:58;
29:20, 21, 27, 29; 20:10, 11.

### Support across the Bible

The Bible refers to [Moses](Moses "Moses") as the authority behind
the books of the Law. The books are referred to as the "Book of
Moses" (5 times
[[1]](http://www.gnpcb.org/esv/search/?words=&phrase=book+of+moses&not-words=&scope=&matches=&search-text=all)),
the "Law of Moses" (22 times
[[2]](http://www.gnpcb.org/esv/search/?q=+%22law+of+moses%22)), the
"Book of the Law of Moses" (4 times
[[3]](http://www.gnpcb.org/esv/search/?q=+%22book+of+the+law+of+moses%22)),
the "Word of the Lord by Moses" (1 Time
[[4]](http://www.gnpcb.org/esv/search/?q=2+Chronicles+35:6)), and
the contents of the books are attributed to Moses over 32 times
(cf. 2 K. 21:8, 1 Ch. 15:15, 1 Ch. 22:13, 2 Ch 24:6, 2 Ch. 33:8, 2
Ch. 34:14, Ne. 1:8, Ne. 8:14, Ne. 10:29, Mal. 4:4, Matt. 8:4, Matt.
19:8, Matt. 22:14, Mark 1:44, Mark 7:10, Mark 10:4, Luke 5:14, Luke
20:37, Luke 24:27, John 1:45, John 5:46, John 7:19, John 7:22, John
8:5, Acts 3:22, Acts 15:21, Acts 26:22, Rom. 10:5, Rom. 10:19, 2
Cor. 3:15, Heb. 9:19).

[Jesus](Jesus "Jesus") (John 5:46, Mark 10:5), [Paul](Paul "Paul")
(Rom. 10:5), and [Philip](Philip "Philip") (John 1:45) all attest
to Moses writing.

### Jewish and early Christian support

The Jewish [talmud](Talmud "Talmud") refers to the first five books
of the Bible as the "Book of Moses." Furthermore, the
[Mishna](index.php?title=Mishna&action=edit&redlink=1 "Mishna (page does not exist)")
and the early Jewish historian [Josephus](Josephus "Josephus") both
accepted the Mosaic authorship of the Pentateuch (Arnold and Beyer,
p. 69).

*This is a **[section stub](http://www.theopedia.com/Category:Theopedia_sectionstubs "Category:Theopedia sectionstubs")**. Please edit it to add information.*
### Support from Jesus

[Jesus](Jesus "Jesus") divided the Old Testament into three
sections in Luke 24:27, 44: Moses, the Prophets, and the Psalms.
Also, in Mark 10:4-8, Jesus quoted Gen. 2:24 as coming from Moses.
In Mark 7:10, Jesus quoted the Ten Commandments as coming from
Moses. In Mark 10:3 Jesus refers to Deut. 24:1f as being from
Moses, and in Matt. 8:4 Jesus quoted Lev. 14 as coming from Moses.
[[5]](http://www.carm.org/bible/jedp_b.htm)

## Did Moses write everything?

"Although biblical scholarship is deeply divided on the issue of
how the Pentateuch was composed, there is widespread agreement that
the Pentateuch, as it now stands, is an edited work and not a piece
of literature that was penned... by one individual," (Alexander, p.
61-62). This conclusion stems from the fact that the Pentateuch
occasionally refers to other pre-existing documents that were
written down prior to the writing of Genesis through Deuteronomy
(e.g. Gen 5:1; Ex 17:14, 24:7, 34:27; Num 21:14-15, 33:2; Deut
31:9, 22, 24). The idea that Moses wrote all of the Pentateuch also
becomes difficult when it is realized that he could not have
described his own death and burial in Deut 34.

"While the long-standing tradition of Mosaic authorship is based
upon clear statements that Moses was responsible for writing
substantial parts of the Pentateuch, the weight of evidence
suggests that Moses probably did not compose the Pentateuch as we
now have it... This is not to say that the Pentateuch's claims
concerning Moses' literary activity should be rejected. On the
contrary, such assertions ought to be respected and given serious
consideration, which unfortunately all too rarely happens,"
(Alexander, p. 70).

We do know that [Joshua](Joshua "Joshua") was Moses' assistant (Ex.
33:11), which quite likely included scribal and editorial duties.
He was also the God-appointed successor to Moses (Num. 27:18-21), a
prophet whom the Lord spoke to directly (Dt. 34:9, Jos. 1:1-9), and
a leader the people obeyed just as they obeyed Moses (Jos. 1:17).
We know that Joshua was with Moses when he spoke to God on Mt.
Sinai (Ex. 24:13) and in the tent of meeting (Ex. 33:11). We also
know that Joshua also contributed to the "Book of the Law of God"
(Jos. 24:26). Although not recorded, it is likely that the death of
Moses was recorded by Joshua.

## References

-   T. Desmond Alexander and David W. Baker, "Authorship of the
    Pentateuch", by T.D. Alexander,
    *Dictionary of the Old Testament: Pentateuch* (IVP, 2003) pp. 61-72
-   Bill Arnold and Bryan Beyer, *Encountering the Old Testament*.
    (Baker, 1999) pp. 68-9

## See also

-   [Pentateuch](Pentateuch "Pentateuch")
-   [Moses](Moses "Moses")
-   [JEDP theory](JEDP_theory "JEDP theory")

## External links

-   [Moses: The Author of the Pentateuch?](http://www.equip.org/free/CP1010.htm)
    (CRI)
-   [Mosaic Authorship of the Pentateuchâ€”Tried and True](http://www.apologeticspress.org/articles/13),
    by Eric Lyons and Zach Smith
-   [Pentateuch](http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/11646c.htm),
    Catholic Encyclopedia (newadvent.org)



