**Halloween** is a holiday celebrated on the night of October 31,
usually by children dressing in costumes and going door-to-door
collecting candy.

## History

"Originally a Celtic festival, Samhain, the last day of October
became All Hallows Eve in the eighth century when Pope Gregory III
moved All Saints' Day (or Hallows' Day) to November 1. The move was
a means to claim the day for Christians, yet connections to pagan,
Wiccan, and Druid beliefs remained."
[[1]](http://www.christianitytoday.com/ct/2001/144/31.0.html)

Although various earlier feasts and celebrations were observed to
remember the departed saints, Gregory's Feast of All Saints was
apparently the first such annual observance (and thus not "moved"
from any other date). The Feast of All Souls (November 2) was later
installed as a means of remembering the souls in
[Purgatory](Purgatory "Purgatory").

Some sources place the pagan celebration of Samhain later in
November: "Although little is known about these celebrations, it
seems that the Samhain festivities were observed between November
5-7 (midway between the autumnal equinox and the winter solstice)
with a one-week series of events, ending with the feast of 'the
dead,' which marked the beginning of the new Celtic year."
[[2]](http://www.zenit.org/english/archive/9910/ZE991027.html#item9)

It is unknown exactly how much influence the Celtic celebration had
on the institution of the All Saints, but contemporary American
practices almost certainly have a direct root through the large
Irish (Celtic) immigrant population.

Halloween -- literally "All Hallow's Eve" -- is celebrated on the
"eve" before All Saints ("All Hallowed").

## Arguments for abstaining

### Pagan origins

"More than a thousand years ago Christians confronted pagan rites
appeasing the lord of death and evil spirits. Halloween's unsavory
beginnings preceded Christ's birth when the druids, in what is now
Britain and France, observed the end of summer with sacrifices to
the gods. It was the beginning of the Celtic year, and they
believed Samhain, the lord of death, sent evil spirits abroad to
attack humans, who could escape only by assuming disguises and
looking like evil spirits themselves. The waning of the sun and the
approach of dark winter made the evil spirits rejoice and play
nasty tricks. Most of our Halloween practices can be traced back to
the old pagan rites and superstitions."
[[3]](http://www.christianitytoday.com/ct/2000/140/42.0.html)

### Emphasis on evil and the occult

"Witches, sorcerers, and ghosts are popular figures during
Halloween. But the Bible strictly forbids occult practices such as
witchcraft, sorcery, divination, interpreting omens, casting
spells, and consulting a medium (Deut. 18:9-11). These counterfeit
attempts to see the future, control one's fate, or obtain guidance
are forbidden because God's people are to trust him for their
future and seek his guidance."
[[4]](http://www.christianitytoday.com/tc/2002/005/13.15.html)

"No one can deny that Halloween is mainly focused on fear,
darkness, monsters, the occult and violence. Are these the kinds of
things that we should be exposing our children or ourselves to?
...Halloween is a holiday that glorifies that which is dark, that
which is diabolical. "
[[5]](http://www.wordoftruthradio.com/questions/46.html)

*See Ephesians 5:11 and 1 Thessalonians 5:22*

### Misappropriation of money

Christians who are convicted not to participate in this holiday
also believe that their money could be used in better ways. Rather
than spend money on costumes, parties, candy, etc..., some
Christians would rather give their money to the Church or to
ministries instead.

## Arguments for participating

### Reinterpret or give new meaning

"For the children who will come to our door asking for candy,
Halloween means something different from its original intent.
Anthropologists talk about cultural reinterpretation, which is the
process whereby an imported cultural trait or feature is
reinterpreted to make it compatible with the values of the society
embracing it. Presumably, the parents of little children who come
to the door every year have reinterpreted Halloween, or ignored its
original meaning so that their kids can have fun without the ugly
elements usually associated with Halloween.

"Strictly speaking, it is impossible to reinterpret Halloween.
Unlike Christmas and Easter, which also had pagan origins but were
successfully changed into Christian holidays, Halloween is still
pagan. Parents who dress their children in clown suits don't really
reinterpret the holiday. They just divest it of meaning in order to
turn the children loose for an evening of harmless fun."
[[6]](http://www.christianitytoday.com/holidays/halloween/features/ugliest.html)

### Harmless fun

"[T]here is a place for some harmless fun. Kids love to dress up
and pretend. If the Halloween experience is focused on fantasy
rather than on the occult, I see no harm in it. Make costumes for
your children that represent fun characters, such as Mickey Mouse
or an elderly grandmother, and then let them go door-to-door asking
for treats. This side of Halloween can be thoroughly enjoyable for
little ones."
[James Dobson](index.php?title=James_Dobson&action=edit&redlink=1 "James Dobson (page does not exist)"),[[7]](http://www.focusonyourchild.com/entertain/art1/A0000637.html)

Don't prevent kids from gathering all the free candy they can
because of ancient "pagan" traditions. But, beware of the real
danger: cavities. Adults, that doesn't mean pass out apples. Kids,
that means brush your teeth before bed.

### 'Baptize' the holiday

"...celebrate the fact that at death we pass from the land of
shadows into the land of light."
[[8]](http://www.christianitytoday.com/ct/2000/140/42.0.html)

### Time with one's kids

Many parents look forward to Halloween as it allows them to spend
time with their kids. Having the opportunity to set the focus of
the evening, many parents pray with their kids before they leave to
"trick or treat", and at the end of the night make a point, even as
"childish" as it may seem, to give thanks to God for the candy that
was freely given. Some have even taken the chance to use "free
candy" to talk to their kids and relate this to God's grace that is
given freely to those who believe.

### Evangelism

Many parents who allow their kids to go door-to-door for candy also
have their children carry pieces of paper with passages from the
Bible. When the child receives their candy, in return they leave
the person with a passage from the Bible concerning
[God](God "God")'s love, [Jesus](Jesus "Jesus"),
[salvation](Salvation "Salvation"), etc.

## Alternative celebrations

### Reformation Day

[Reformation Day](index.php?title=Reformation_Day&action=edit&redlink=1 "Reformation Day (page does not exist)")
is a day in remembrance of the Protestant Reformation. It takes
place on October 31 and is official holiday in a lot of countries.

### Costume party

It has been encouraged to throw a party where each individual shows
up wearing a costume. Even though kids may be wearing costumes that
resemble withes, ghosts, or things of this sort, the focus of the
party does not have to be "pagan" or "evil".

### Remembrance of departed believers

"Remember your leaders, those who spoke to you the word of God.
Consider the outcome of their way of life, and imitate their
faith." -Hebrews 13:7

"There are other values in a meeting convened to remember those who
have passed into heaven. Believers who have lost friends or family
members could be encouraged to talk about them openly. What the
Bible teaches about the state of the dead who die in the Lord could
be reviewed, and the occasion could be a fine opportunity for
proclaiming that Christ is Conqueror over death and hell and
Satan."
[[9]](http://www.christianitytoday.com/holidays/halloween/features/ugliest2.html)

### Trunk & Treat

Some churches host what is called a "Trunk and Treat". At this
event, parents arrive having dressed up their cars, using their
trunk (or truck bed) as the area where candy is passed out,
decorations are done, or anything of this sort. Parents fill up the
parking lot, and kids go "car to car" viewing each car's "costume"
and getting candy. It provides a time for parents to allow their
kids to enjoy themselves in a safe environment and all are able to
enjoy fellowship with others from their church.

## Cautions and ideas

Whether one allows their child to participate during Halloween,
parents should be cautioned of a few things. If you decide not
allow your child to participate, be aware of their reactions and
feelings. Typically children (or even teens) will feel left out
from social events, time with their friends, or will feel abnormal,
different, or "not like the other kids". This is not a reason to go
against a personal conviction, but it does mean to be conscious of
their feelings, and to act as a support in their time of
disappointment (not to say all kids will be disappointed). Whether
your child is following Jesus or not, this is a great opportunity
to bring your child to God's Word and introduce or remind them of
the commitment to follow Jesus at any cost. Rent a movie, get some
candy, or plan something fun for the evening.

For those who will be allowing their child to participate, be
cautious of your child's motives to participate. Some may get into
the "evil" side of Halloween too much, while others may want to go
for the social interaction or other reasons. If your child is
following Jesus, help remind them of their commitment to Christ,
and to remain an example to their friends as they "trick or treat"
(this is one of many examples). If you are unsure if your child is
following Jesus, and will still be allowing them to go, perhaps
take time to discuss with them how to make good choices. Find ways
to relate this to Jesus, or God's Word.

## External links

-   [Suggested Guidelines for Christians](http://users.rcn.com/tlclcms/canhall4.htm)
    by Richard Bucher
-   [Annie's "Halloween Welcome" Page](http://www.annieshomepage.com/annieshalloweenpage.html),
    A Christian Perspective on the Holiday
-   [Halloween](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Halloween) (Wikipedia)
-   [The History of Halloween](http://www.historychannel.com/exhibits/halloween/?page=origins)
    (The History Channel)
-   [Halloween](http://nowheresville.us/halloween.php) (The Dane)
-   [The Inevitable Halloween Discussion](http://www.challies.com/archives/001384.php),
    by [Tim Challies](Tim_Challies "Tim Challies")
-   [Home for Halloween](http://www.cbn.com/spirituallife/halloween/fischer_homehalloween.asp),
    by John Fischer
-   [What to Do About Halloween](http://www.focusonyourchild.com/entertain/art1/A0000637.html),
    by James Dobson
-   [Halloween: As Viewed by Evangelical Christians](http://www.religioustolerance.org/hallo_ev.htm),
    by B.A. Robinson
-   [Halloween/All Saints' Day](http://www.christianitytoday.com/holidays/halloween/)
    (collection of Christianity Today articles)
    -   [Why I Let My Kids Go Trick-or-Treating](http://www.christianitytoday.com/tcw/9w5/9w5094.html),
        by Ellie Lofaro
    -   [Is Halloween a Witches' Brew?](http://www.christianitytoday.com/ct/2000/140/42.0.html),
        by Harold L. Myra
    -   [In Perspective: The Christian and the Jack-o'-Lantern](http://www.christianitytoday.com/ct/2001/144/31.0.html),
        by Todd Hertz
    -   [Why Christians should embrace the "devilish" holiday with gusto—and laughter](http://www.christianitytoday.com/ct/2000/011/29.79.html),
        by Anderson M. Rearick III

-   [Reformation Day Fun](http://nikkitatom.blogspot.com/2005/10/reformation-day-fun.html)
-   [The holy, hellish, hodgepodge history of Halloween](http://blog.marshillchurch.org/voxpop/2006/10/10/gimme-some-sugar-baby/),
    by James Harleman
-   [A Perspective on Halloween](http://randyalcorn.blogspot.com/2009/10/perspective-on-halloween.html),
    by
    [Randy Alcorn](index.php?title=Randy_Alcorn&action=edit&redlink=1 "Randy Alcorn (page does not exist)")
-   [What are your thoughts on Halloween?](http://www.desiringgod.org/ResourceLibrary/AskPastorJohn/ByTopic/15/4443_What_are_your_thoughts_on_Halloween/),
    by [John Piper](John_Piper "John Piper")
-   [Why All Good Christians Should Celebrate Halloween](http://betweenthetimes.com/2010/09/28/why-all-good-christians-should-celebrate-halloween/?sms_ss=twitter&at_xt=4ca3751b126b40df,0),
    by George Robinson
-   [The History of Halloween Revisited](http://blog.marshillchurch.org/2009/10/29/the-history-of-halloween-revisted/),
    by James Harleman
-   [Christians and Halloween](http://www.gty.org/resources/Articles/A123#.Tqb0SN6Ik9p), by Travis Allen (Grace To You)
-   [What Christians Should Know about Halloween](http://theresurgence.com/2011/10/31/what-christians-should-know-about-halloween), by Justin Holcomb