The name **Reformed Baptist** does not refer to a distinct
[denomination](Denomination "Denomination") but instead is a
description of the theological leaning of certain
[Baptist](Baptist "Baptist") churches. Not all churches that are
[reformed](Reformed "Reformed") in [doctrine](Doctrine "Doctrine")
identify themselves as such. There are two associations of Reformed
Baptist churches in the United States: the Association of Reformed
Baptist Churches of America, which began in 1997, and the
Fellowship of Independent Reformed Evangelicals, organized in 2000.
There are also many associations and churches in other countries.

Reformed Baptist churches quite often adhere to either the First or
Second
[London Baptist Confession](London_Baptist_Confession_of_1689 "London Baptist Confession of 1689")
of 1644 and 1689 respectively. These two statements are usually not
considered exhaustive, but instead are convenient summaries of a
church's belief. Reformed Baptists attempt to derive all of their
doctrine directly from the [Bible](Bible "Bible"), which they see
as the sole authority of faith and practice.

Reformed Baptist Churches are distinct in that they are both
Reformed (adhering to much of [Calvinism](Calvinism "Calvinism"))
as well as [Baptists](Baptist "Baptist") (believing in baptism for
believers only, and that by immersion). Historically, the
[Five Points of Calvinism](TULIP "TULIP") have been central tenets
of the Reformed faith, with which all Reformed Baptist churches
agree by definition.

However, Reformed theology is normally committed to
[Covenant theology](Covenant_theology "Covenant theology"), one
application of which is to justify the practice of
[infant baptism](Infant_baptism "Infant baptism"). For this reason
more traditional Reformed branches of Christianity
([Presbyterian](Presbyterian "Presbyterian"), etc) sometimes refuse
to accept their Reformed Baptist brothers as *truly Reformed*.
Nevertheless, Reformed Baptists are distinctly Covenantal in their
theology, regarding the
[Covenant of Grace](Covenant_theology "Covenant theology") as made
only with the elect. [Baptism](Baptism "Baptism") is seen as a sign
of the New Covenant administration - made with those who have been
regenerated by having the law written on their hearts, their sins
forgiven and who savingly know the Lord (Jeremiah 31:31-34). As
typical of Baptists, only those who can credibly profess this
reality are to be baptized.

Modern Reformed Baptists usually consider themselves the spiritual
heirs of English Baptists [John Bunyan](John_Bunyan "John Bunyan")
and [Charles Spurgeon](Charles_Spurgeon "Charles Spurgeon"). The
Calvinist theology of the Reformed Baptist is akin to if not
descended directly from that of early English Particular Baptists.

## Contents

-   [1 Common traits of Reformed Baptists](#Common_traits_of_Reformed_Baptists)
-   [2 Other Calvinistic Baptists](#Other_Calvinistic_Baptists)
-   [3 Related history](#Related_history)
-   [4 External links](#External_links)

## Common traits of Reformed Baptists

-   The centrality of the [Word of God](Bible "Bible"): the church
    takes no part in human schemes for church growth, nor searches for
    popularity, but sows the Word and trusts God will make it
    multiply.

-   [Creedalism](Creeds "Creeds"): historic creeds of the faith are
    considered useful, but not necessarily authoritative.

-   [The Regulative Principle of Worship](The_Regulative_Principle_of_Worship "The Regulative Principle of Worship"):
    the belief that "the acceptable way of Worshipping the true God, is
    instituted by himself; and so limited by his own revealed will,
    that he may not be Worshipped according to the imaginations, and
    devices of Men, or the suggestions of Satan, under any visible
    representations, or any other way, not prescribed in the Holy
    Scriptures," (from chapter 22, paragraph 1 of the
    [London Baptist Confession of 1689](London_Baptist_Confession_of_1689 "London Baptist Confession of 1689")).
    This is usually manifested in a relatively simple liturgy.

-   [Covenant Theology](Covenant_Theology "Covenant Theology"):
    most hold to the classic Reformed contrast between the Covenant of
    Works in Adam and the Covenant of Grace in Christ (the last Adam) -
    and the Elect in Him as His seed. This eternal Covenant of Grace is
    progressively revealed through the historic Biblical covenants.

-   [Local autonomy](Church_government "Church government"): each
    congregation is a fully independent church, which considers itself
    accountable directly to Jesus Christ rather than intermediately
    through an earthly organization such as a Convention, Synod or
    Presbytery.

-   Plurality in Leadership: each local church has multiple
    [Elders](Elder "Elder") as well as one or more
    [Pastors](Pastor "Pastor") (also known as plurality of elders);
    often the terms are interchangeable or denote only a difference in
    full or partial-time dedication to the ministry. Often all leaders
    are called elders, with the pastor being considered only a primus
    inter pares.

-   The reservation of the
    [Elder role for men](Complementarianism "Complementarianism"), and
    usually also that of Deacon.

-   Moderate [Cessationism](Cessationism "Cessationism"): the
    supernatural
    [Gifts of the Holy Ghost](Gifts_of_the_Spirit "Gifts of the Spirit")
    in general, and Revivals specifically, are considered exceptional
    measures sovereignly bestowed by God, not to be searched as a
    common policy. Thus a rejection of man-generated Revivalism in
    general and [Pentecostalism](Pentecostalism "Pentecostalism")
    specifically.

-   The idea of the Sunday as the Christian
    [Sabbath](Sabbath "Sabbath") (except for
    [New Covenant Theologians](New_Covenant_Theology "New Covenant Theology")).

## Other Calvinistic Baptists

Other independent Calvinistic Baptist churches have purposefully
avoided calling themselves "Reformed" Baptists because of
recognized differences beyond the issue of baptism. Many of these
have become associated with
[New Covenant Theology](New_Covenant_Theology "New Covenant Theology")
which is seen as an alternative to the Reformed
[Covenant Theology](Covenant_Theology "Covenant Theology"). These
churches usually adhere to the First London Baptist Confession of
Faith (especially in its 1646 edition) rather than the later
[London Baptist Confession of 1689](London_Baptist_Confession_of_1689 "London Baptist Confession of 1689")
which was for the most part a restatement of the
[Westminster Confession](Westminster_Confession "Westminster Confession")
with minor changes to accommodate
[believer baptism](Believer's_baptism "Believer's baptism").

## Related history

In the early 17th century, [Baptists](Baptists "Baptists") in
England developed along two different theological lines. The
General Baptists were so-called because they held to a General (or
universal) [atonement](Atonement "Atonement"), which maintains that
Christ died for all men alike, making a general provision for all
on the condition of faith. This is the same
[universal atonement](Universal_atonement "Universal atonement") of
Arminianism. Early General Baptist leaders included John Smyth and
Thomas Helwys.

The Particular Baptists were so-called because they held the
Particular (or limited) atonement. The Particular view of the
atonement is that Christ in His death undertook to save particular
individuals, referred to as the [elect](Election "Election"). This
position is the same
[limited atonement](Limited_atonement "Limited atonement") of
classic [Calvinism](Calvinism "Calvinism"). Some early Particular
Baptist leaders included
[Benjamin Keach](Benjamin_Keach "Benjamin Keach"), Hanserd Knollys,
and William Kiffin.

Present day [Strict Baptists](Strict_Baptist "Strict Baptist") of
England are descendants of the Particular Baptists. Sometimes they
are referred to as "Strict and Particular" Baptists. The term
"strict" refers to the strict or closed position they held on
membership and communion. The majority of early Particular Baptists
rejected open membership and open communion. One notable exception
was the author of Pilgrim's Progress,
[John Bunyan](John_Bunyan "John Bunyan"). Over the 18th century,
General Baptists lapsed into theological liberalism and practically
disappeared from the scene in England. During this same period, the
Particular Baptists moved toward extreme doctrinal conservatism,
which some have described as
[Hyper-Calvinism](Hyper-Calvinism "Hyper-Calvinism") and
[Antinomianism](Antinomianism "Antinomianism"). In 1785,
[Andrew Fuller](Andrew_Fuller "Andrew Fuller") (1754-1815)
published The Gospel Worthy of All Acceptation. This helped turn
many Particular Baptists toward a new evangelicalism that was
dubbed "Fullerism," and would lead to eventual division among the
Particular Baptists of England. The "Fullerites" are probably best
represented by Fuller and
[William Carey](William_Carey "William Carey") (1761-1834), Baptist
missionary to India. The leading spokesman for strict Calvinism was
[John Gill](John_Gill "John Gill") (1696-1771), perhaps best known
for his Exposition of the Whole Bible, the only commentary to
comment on every verse of the Bible. Among the "Fuller strain" of
Particular Baptists, Calvinism declined and the practice of open
communion grew. In 1891, most of the remaining General Baptists
merged with the Particular Baptists in the Baptist Union of Great
Britain (formed 1813). The Old Baptist Union represents General
Baptists that did not participate.

## External links

-   [Reformed Baptist Fellowship](http://www.reformedbaptistfellowship.org/)
    — Reformed Baptist Fellowship is a global network of churches
    adhering to the London Baptist Confession of Faith of 1689. RBF
    encourages mutual cooperation for missions, church planting,
    edification and fellowship.

-   [Founders Ministries](http://www.founders.org/) — a site
    committed to preserving historic Reformed principles within the
    [Southern Baptist Convention](Southern_Baptist_Convention "Southern Baptist Convention")

-   [Grace and Truth Christian congregation in Israel](http://www.graceandtruthbulletin.org/)
    — a Reformed Baptist congregation

-   [International Fellowship of Reformed Baptists](http://www.reformation-today.org/ifrb/)
    — an international body to promote unity among Reformed Baptists

-   [Johnny Farese's Reformed Baptist Church Directory](http://www.farese.com/rbcd/rbcd.htm)
    — an informal directory of "churches which either claim to hold to
    the 1689 Confession of Faith; correspond with and pray for other
    sister churches; and/or fellowship with other sister churches
    through family conferences, pastors' conferences, etc."

-   [New Zealand Reformed Baptist Churches](http://www.rbc.org.nz/)
    — official site

-   [Reformed Baptist Association in South Africa Web Site](http://www.reformed.org.za/)
    — official site, in Afrikaans and English

-   [What is a Reformed Baptist](http://www.vor.org/truth/refbapt.html)
    — a Reformed Baptist explains his beliefs

-   [Reformed Baptist Network](http://www.ReformedBaptistNetwork.org)
    - Free Webpage for Reformed Baptist Churches Worldwide

-   [Association of Reformed Baptist Churches of America](http://www.arbca.com)
    — official site



