The **Reformed Church in the United States** (RCUS) is a
denomination from the German Reformed Tradition. The RCUS began in
1747, follows the Three Forms of Unity, and is dedicated to
promoting Biblical Christianity throughout the world.

## History

The RCUS began as many Germans immigrated to America and gathered
in local congregations. The first church constitution can be dated
back to 1725 and was written by John Philip Boehm who served many
churches. In 1747 the German Reformed Coetus formed under the
guidance of Rev. Michael Schlatter. The Coetus adopted the
Heidelberg Catechism, the Belgic Confession, and the Canons of Dort
in 1748. The German Coetus in America stood under the authority of
the Holland Classis of the Dutch Reformed Church. This relationship
dissolved peacefully in 1793 as the Coetus became the German
Reformed Classis. At some unknown point after 1793 the Classis
dropped the Canons of Dort and the Belgic Confession and the only
standard was the Heidelberg Catechism.

In 1820 the Synod of the RCUS voted to establish a theological
seminary, but nothing would come of the effort until 1825 when Dr.
Lewis Mayer became the only professor of the RCUS seminary. In 1837
the seminary relocated to Mercersburg Pennsylvania. In 1840 it
called John Nevin to be a teacher at the seminary and in 1844
Philip Schaff was also made a professor. The seminary would then
become a source of major contention as Schaff and Nevin became the
fathers of what is known as Mercersburg Theology.

In 1934 the RCUS General Synod voted to merge with the Evangelical
Lutheran Church. This action was objected to by the Eureka Classis,
a synod formed on the basis of language in 1910, and made up
primarily of German-Russian immigrants. When the two churches met
together and officially merged in 1940 the Eureka Classis declared
itself to be the continuing RCUS. The rest of the denomination
formed the new Evangelical and Reformed Church (E&R). In 1957 the
E&R merged with the Congregational Christian Churches to form the
United Churches of Christ.

The Eureka Classis continued on despite a lack of ministers
gathering new churches and new ministers slowly. In 1953 the RCUS
Eureka Classis began to send it men to Westminster Seminary for
training. This led to a formal relationship with the
[Orthodox Presbyterian Church](Orthodox_Presbyterian_Church "Orthodox Presbyterian Church")
in 1960. In 1968 men and churches from the General Association of
Regular Baptists joined the RCUS. A new constitution was passed in
1985 that allowed the formation of a Synod. This was done
officially in 1986 as the Eureka Classis was dissolved and the
Synod of the RCUS formed again. This synod contained four Classes:
Northern Plains, Western, South Central, and Covenant East. In 1995
the Belgic Confession and Canons of Dort were again officially
added as standards making the RCUS a Three Forms of Unity church
once again.

The RCUS is a member denomination of the North American
Presbyterian and Reformed Council (NAPARC) and the International
Council of Reformed Churches (ICRC).

## Resources

-   *You Shall Be My People*. edited by Rev. Norman Hoeflinger and
    Rev. Robert Grossmann.

## External links

-   [Official RCUS Webstie](http://www.rcus.org)



