**Gehenna** is an English transliteration of the Greek word
*[γέενναν](http://www.zhubert.com/word?word=γέενναν&root=γέεννα&number=590319)*,
which in turn is from the Hebrew word *gê’ hinnom*, literally the
valley of Hinnom.

John F. Walvoord writes,

"All the references to *gehenna*, except James 3:6, are from the
lips of Christ himself, and there is an obvious emphasis on the
punishment for the wicked after death as being everlasting. The
term *gehenna* is derived from the Valley of Hinnom, traditionally
considered by the Jews the place of the final punishment of the
ungodly. Located just south of Jerusalem, it is referred to in
Joshua 15:8 and 18:16, where this valley was considered a boundary
between the tribes of Judah and Benjamin. In this place human
sacrifices were offered to Molech; these altars were destroyed by
Josiah (2 Kings 23:10). The valley was later declared to be 'the
valley of slaughter' by Jeremiah (Jer. 7:30-33). The valley was
used as a burial place for criminals and for burning garbage.
Whatever its historical and geographic meaning, its usage in the
New Testament is clearly a reference to the everlasting state of
the wicked, and this seems to be the thought in every instance. In
James 3:6 the damage accomplished by an uncontrolled tongue is
compared to a fire which 'corrupts the whole person, sets the whole
course of his life on fire, and is itself set on fire by hell.'
"Christ warned that a person who declares others a fool 'will be in
danger of the fire of hell' (Matt. 5:22). In Matthew 5:29 Christ
states that it is better to lose an eye than to be thrown into
*gehenna*, with a similar thought regarding it being better to lose
a hand than to go into *gehenna* (Matt. 5:30). In Matthew 10:28
believers in Christ are told not to be afraid of those who kill the
body, but rather to 'fear him which is able to destroy both soul
and body in hell' (KJV). A similar thought is mentioned in Matthew
18:9, where it is declared better 'to enter life with one eye than
to have two eyes and be thrown into the fire of hell.' In Matthew
23:15 Christ denounces the Pharisees who 'travel over land and sea
to win a single convert, and when he becomes one, you make him
twice as much a son of hell as you are.' In Matthew 23:33 he
denounces the Pharisees and the scribes, asking the question, 'How
will you escape being condemned to hell?' In Mark 9:43, 45, 47, the
thought recorded in Matthew about it being better to lose part of
the body than to be cast into hell is repeated (cf. Matt. 5:22, 29,
30). Luke 12:5 contains a similar thought to that expressed in
Matthew 10:28, that one should fear the devil far more than those
who might kill them physically. Though not always expressly stated,
the implication is that the punishment will have duration and be
endless."^[[1]](#note-0)^
William Crockett writes,

"In the New Testament the final destination of the wicked is
pictured as a place of blazing sulfur, where the burning smoke
ascends forever. This would have been an effective image because
sulfur fires were part of life for those who lived in the Jerusalem
of Bible times. Southwest of the city was the Valley of Hinnom, an
area that had a long history of desecration. The steep gorge was
once used to burn children in sacrifice to the Ammonite god Molech
(2 Kings 23:10; Jer. 7:31; 32:35). Jeremiah denounced such
practices by saying that Hinnom Valley would become the valley of
God's judgment, a place of slaughter (Jer. 7:32; 19:5-7). As the
years passed, a sense of foreboding hung over the valley. People
began to burn their garbage and offal there, using sulfur, the
flammable substance we now use in matches and gunpowder.
Eventually, the Hebrew name *ge-hinnom* (canyon of Hinnom) evolved
into *geenna* (*gehenna*), the familiar Greek word for hell (Matt.
5:22, 29; 10:28; 18:9; 23:33; Mark 9:43, 45; Luke 12:5). Thus when
the Jews talked about punishment in the next life, what better
image could they use than the smoldering valley they called
*gehenna*?
"In the intertestamental period, *gehenna* was widely used as a
metaphor for hell, the place of eternal damnation. Later, in
rabbinic literature, we find *gehenna* given a location—in the
depths of the earth, and sometimes in Africa beyond the Mountains
of Darkness. Some Jews, of course, took the fiery images literally,
supposing that Hinnom Valley itself would become the place of
hellfire and judgment (1 Enoch 27:1-2; 54:1-6; 56:3-4; 90:26-28; 4
Ezra 7:36). But this view was minor and not widely held in Judaism.
The New Testament also rejects this view, saying that *gehenna* is
already in some sense prepared elsewhere (Matt. 25:41), just as
heaven is (Matt. 25:34; John 14:2; Heb. 11:16)."^[[2]](#note-1)^
## Notes

1.  [↑](#ref-0) John F. Walvoord in *Four Views on Hell*, p. 20
2.  [↑](#ref-1) William Crockett in *Four Views on Hell*, p. 58

## See also

-   [Sheol](Sheol "Sheol")
-   [Hades](Hades "Hades")
-   [Tartarus](Tartarus "Tartarus")
-   [Hell](Hell "Hell")

## External links

-   [The Myth of the Burning Garbage Dump of Gehenna](http://blog.bibleplaces.com/2011/04/myth-of-burning-garbage-dump-of-gehenna.html),
    by Todd Bolen
-   [The Fires of Gehenna: Views of Scholars](http://blog.bibleplaces.com/2011/04/fires-of-gehenna-views-of-scholars.html),
    by Todd Bolen



