**George Wishart** (1513-1546) "a powerful Protestant preacher,
confidant and mentor of John Knox. While preaching the Protestant
Reform in 1546 he was betrayed to Cardinal David Beaton and
imprisoned in the bottle dungeon at the Castle in St. Andrews.
Subsequently he was tried for heresy, condemned to death and burnt
at the stake outside the Castle."
[[1]](http://www.wishart.org/georgewishart.html)

## Biographical sketch

According to John Howie in *Scots Worthies* (revised by W H Carslaw
and published at an unknown date by Oliphant, Anderson and
Ferrier), George Wishart was brother to the Laird of Pitarrow, near
Montrose, in Mearns, Scotland. Wishart was educated at Cambridge
University, and returned to his home county in 1544 and began
teaching in a school in Montrose. By all accounts he was an
accomplish scholar and teacher - and of admirable character.

Wishart left Montrose for Dundee where he was famed for his public
lectures on the Letter to the Romans, and his popularity and
teaching provoked the local clergy, principally Cardinal David
Beaton, to jealousy. Since the matyrdom of Patrick Hamilton it was
dangerous to provoke opposition from the tyranny of these men.
Beaton persuaded the Dundee gentry to issue an edict against
Wishart to silence him. Wishart left Dundee for Ayrshire, but
Beaton stirred up the Archbishop of Glasgow to stop Wishart
preaching.

About a month or so after his leaving Dundee, Wishart learned that
plague had broken out in the city just a few days after he left. He
learned, too, that many people had been smitten and he was
constrained to return. Intimation was made that he would preach
from the top of the Eastgate of the city, with the infected people
standing outside the gate and those not infected on the city side
of the gate. He stood, as it were, between the living and the dead.
He preached from Psalm 107:20, "He sent his Word and healed them,
and delivered them from their destruction." The people were so
comforted by his preaching that they asked him to continue to
preach while the plague raged, which Wishart agreed to do, and he
put himself at risk of being infected by the plague as he attended
the poor and needy.

The Cardinal made attempts to assassinate Wishart but they failed.
But Wishart knew his days were drawing to a close and that he would
suffer for his faith and in his sermons prior to his death he
hinted that his ministry was near to an end.

While Wishart was at Ormiston, the Earl of Bothwell surrounded the
Laird of Ormiston's house where he was staying for the night.
Wishart surrendered himself into Bothwell's hand and he was carted
off to Edinburgh to appear before the blood-thirsty Cardinal
Beaton. He was then sent to St Andrew's where he was imprisoned
prior to the mockery of a trial. He was condemned as a heretic and
sentenced to being burnt to death. Bags of gunpowder were fastened
around him, a rope put round his neck, a chain round his waist, and
his hands tied behind him. He was brought to the stake prepared for
him near the Cardinal's palace. The great guns of the castle had
been brought out lest anyone should attempt to rescue him. He
addressed the crowd. "I entreat you that you love the Word of God
for your salvation, and suffer patiently and with a comfortable
heart for the Word's sake, which is your everlasting comfort. For
the true Gospel, which was given me by the Grace of God, I suffer
this day with a glad heart. Behold and consider my visage; ye shall
not see me change my colour. I fear not this fire, and I pray that
you may not fear them that slay the body, but have no power to slay
the soul." Then having prayed, the executioner kindled the fire and
the powder fastened to his body blew up. Still alive he said, "The
flame has scorched my body, yet it has not daunted my spirit." The
executioner pulled the cord that was around his neck and he spoke
no more. George Wishart obtained the martyr's crown on March 1,
1546.



