The **Great Commission** is the name given to Jesus' command found
in the [Gospel of Matthew](Gospel_of_Matthew "Gospel of Matthew").
The command is to "make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in
the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, and
teaching them to obey everything I have commanded you. And surely I
am with you always, to the very end of the age," (Matt. 28:19-20).

Other versions of the Great Commission are found in Mark 16:14-18,
Luke 24:44-49, Acts 1:4-8 and John 20:21.

The instructions from Jesus suggest that his followers have the
duty to go, teach, and baptize. Although, the command was initially
given directly only to Christ's Eleven Apostles, Christian theology
has typically interpreted the commission as a directive to all
Christians of every time and place.

Evangelicals often contrast this *Great Commission* with the
earlier *Limited Commission* of Matthew 10:5-42, in which they were
to restrict their mission to their fellow Israelites, to whom Jesus
referred as "the lost sheep of the house of Israel" Matthew 15:24.

*This article is a **[stub](http://www.theopedia.com/Category:Theopedia_stubs "Category:Theopedia stubs")**. Please edit it to add information.*
## See also

-   [Gospel message](Gospel_message "Gospel message")
-   [Missiology](Missiology "Missiology")
-   [Ethnos](Ethnos "Ethnos")

It must be noted that the goal of the Great Commission is not to
produce mere converts, but rather mature believers in Christ who
are obedient to His commands. Christ modeled this approach with the
12 disciples. Instead of working to produce a great number of
converts with very little depth or maturity to their faith, Christ
focused most of His energy and time with a select few with the hope
that they would pour all that they had learned into the lives of
others.



