The **Great Schism**, also known as the **East-West Schism**, was
the event that divided "Chalcedonian" Christianity into Western
(Roman)
[Catholicism](Roman_Catholic_Church "Roman Catholic Church") and
[Eastern Orthodoxy](Eastern_Orthodoxy "Eastern Orthodoxy").^[[1]](#note-0)^
Though normally dated to 1054, when Pope Leo IX and Patriarch
Michael I excommunicated each other, the East-West Schism was
actually the result of an extended period of estrangement between
the two bodies of churches. The primary causes of the Schism were
disputes over papal authority -- the Roman Pope claimed he held
authority over the four Eastern patriarchs, while the four eastern
patriarchs claimed that the primacy of the Patriarch of Rome was
only honorary, and thus he had authority only over Western
Christians -- and over the insertion of the
[filioque clause](Filioque_clause "Filioque clause") into the
[Nicene Creed](Nicene_Creed "Nicene Creed"). There were other, less
significant catalysts for the Schism, including variance over
liturgical practices and conflicting claims of jurisdiction.

The Church split along doctrinal, theological, linguistic,
political, and geographic lines, and the fundamental breach has
never been healed. It might be alleged that the two churches
actually reunited in 1274 (by the Second Council of Lyons) and in
1439 (by the Council of Basel), but in each case the councils were
repudiated by the Orthodox as a whole, given that the hierarchs had
overstepped their authority in consenting to these so-called
"unions". Further attempts to reconcile the two bodies have failed;
however, several ecclesiastical communities that originally sided
with the East changed their loyalties, and are now called Eastern
Rite Catholic Churches. For the most part, however, the Western and
the Eastern Churches are separate. Each takes the view that it is
the "One Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church", implying that the
other group left the true church during the Schism.

## Origins

Since its earliest days, the Church recognized the special
positions of three bishops, who were known as patriarchs: the
Bishop of Rome, the Bishop of Alexandria, and the Bishop of
Antioch. They were joined by the Bishop of Constantinople and by
the Bishop of Jerusalem, both confirmed as patriarchates by the
Council of Chalcedon in 451. The patriarchs held both authority and
precedence over fellow bishops in the Church. Among them, the
Bishop of Rome (the Pope) was deemed to hold a higher status, by
virtue of his position as the successor of Saint Peter. Moreover,
the Pope's see was of particular importance, as Rome was the
capital of the Roman Empire. Even after
[Constantine](Constantine "Constantine") I moved the capital of the
Roman Empire from Rome to Constantinople in 330, the Pope retained
his position as first among equals (*primus inter pares*) in the
hierarchy, although this was not accompanied by any sort of veto or
other monarchical powers over the other Patriarchs.

Disunion in the Roman Empire further contributed to disunion in the
Church. Theodosius the Great, who died in 395, was the last Emperor
to rule over a united Roman Empire; after his death, his territory
was divided into western and eastern halves, each under its own
Emperor. By the end of the fifth century, the Western Roman Empire
had been decimated by the barbarians, while the Eastern Roman
Empire (known also as the Byzantine Empire) continued to thrive.
Thus, the political unity in the Empire was the first to fall.

Other factors caused the East and West to drift further apart. The
dominant language of the West was Latin, while that of the East was
Greek. Soon after the fall of the Western Empire, the number of
individuals who spoke both Latin and Greek began to dwindle, and
communication between East and West grew much more difficult. With
linguistic unity gone, cultural unity began to crumble as well. The
two halves of the Church were naturally divided along similar
lines; they used different rites and had different approaches to
religious doctrines. Although the Great Schism was still centuries
away, its outlines were already perceptible.

## Early schisms

The Great Schism was not the first schism between East and West;
there had, in fact, been over two centuries of schism during the
first millennium of the Church. From 343 to 398, the Church was
split over [Arianism](Arianism "Arianism"), a doctrine supported by
many in the East, though rejected by the Pope in the West. A new
controversy arose in 404, when the Byzantine Emperor Arcadius
deposed the Roman-backed Patriarch of Constantinople, John
Chrysostom. The Pope soon broke off communion with all the eastern
patriarchates, for they had countenanced Chrysostom's banishment.
The division was healed only in 415, when the eastern patriarchs
retroactively recognised Chrysostom as legitimate.

Another conflict broke out when, in 482, the Byzantine Emperor Zeno
issued an edict known as the *Henotikon*, which sought to reconcile
the differences between most of the Church (which believed that
Jesus Christ had two natures: human and divine) and the
monophysites (who believed that Jesus Christ had only a divine
nature). The edict, however, received the condemnation of Pope
Felix III. In 484, the Pope excommunicated Acacius, the Patriarch
of Constantinople who urged Zeno to issue the *Henotikon*. The
schism was ended in 519 -- over thirty years later -- when the
Byzantine Emperor Justin I recognised Acacius's excommunication.
However, the Patriarchs of Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem now
embraced [Miaphysitism](Miaphysitism "Miaphysitism") and rejected
the Council of Chalcedon. Thus, although technically reunited, the
Church was in actuality diverging.

## Great Schism

The catalysts of the Great Schism included:

-   the insertion of the
    [filioque clause](Filioque_clause "Filioque clause") into the
    [Nicene Creed](Nicene_Creed "Nicene Creed") by the Roman church in
    direct violation of the command of the Council of Ephesus, an
    action called non-canonical by the Eastern church.
-   disputes in the Balkans over whether the Western or Eastern
    church had jurisdiction.
-   the designation of the Patriarch of Constantinople as
    [ecumenical](Ecumenical "Ecumenical") patriarch (which was
    understood by Rome as *universal patriarch* and therefore
    disputed).
-   disputes over whether the Patriarch of Rome, the Pope, should
    be considered a higher authority than the other Patriarchs. All
    five Patriarchs of the One Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church
    agreed that the Patriarch of Rome should receive higher honors than
    the other four; they disagreed about whether he had authority over
    the other four and, if he did, how extensive that authority might
    be.
-   the concept of Caesaropapism, a tying together in some way of
    the ultimate political and religious authorities, which were
    physically separated much earlier when the capital of the empire
    was moved from Rome to Constantinople. There is controversy over
    just how much this so-called "Caesaropapism" actually existed and
    how much was a fanciful invention, centuries later, by western
    European historians.
-   certain liturgical practices in the west that the East believed
    represented innovation: use of unleavened bread for the Eucharist,
    for example. Eastern innovations, such as intinction (dipping) of
    the bread in the wine for Communion, were condemned several times
    by Rome but were never the occasion of schism.

This conflict led to the exchange of excommunications by the
representative of Pope Leo IX and the Patriarch of Constantinople,
Michael Cerularius, in 1054 (finally rescinded in 1965) and the
separation of the Roman Catholic and the Orthodox churches, each of
which now claims to be "the One Holy Catholic and Apostolic
Church." It should be noted that at the time of the mutual
excommunications, Pope Leo IX was dead. Therefore, the authority of
Cardinal Humbertus, the Pope's legate, had ceased; therefore he
could not legitimately excommunicate Patriarch Cerularius.

The final breach is often considered to have arisen after the
sacking of Constantinople by the Fourth Crusade in 1204. This
Fourth Crusade had the Latin Church directly involved in a military
assault against the Byzantine Empire, Constantinople, and the
Orthodox Patriarchate. The sacking of the Church of Holy Wisdom and
establishment of the Latin Empire in 1204 is viewed with some
rancor to the present day. In 2004, Pope John Paul II extended a
formal apology for the sacking of Constantinople in 1204; the
apology was formally accepted by Patriarch Bartholomew of
Constantinople.

## Reconciliation

On November 27, 2004, in an attempt to "promote Christian unity",
Pope John Paul II returned the bones (relics) of Patriarchs John
Chrysostom and Gregory Nazianzen to Istanbul. The former of the two
relics was taken as war booty from Constantinople by Crusaders in
1204, and many believe the latter was taken then as well. However,
the Vatican says the bones of the second saint were brought to Rome
by Byzantine monks in the 8th Century.

Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew I together with other heads of
self-governed Eastern Churches were present at Pope John Paul II
funeral on April 8, 2005. This is the first time for many centuries
that an Ecumenical Patriarch has attended the funeral of a Pope and
has been interpreted to mean that dialogue towards reconciliation
might have started.^[[2]](#note-1)^^[[3]](#note-2)^

## Notes

1.  [↑](#ref-0) "Great Schism" World Encyclopedia. Philip's, 2008.
    Oxford Reference Online. Oxford University Press. King County
    Library System. 17 March 2010
    <[http://www.oxfordreference.com/views/ENTRY.html?subview=Main&entry=t142.e4859](http://www.oxfordreference.com/views/ENTRY.html?subview=Main&entry=t142.e4859)\>
2.  [↑](#ref-1) John Burger. "Archbishop Hilarion on Christian
    Unity". National Catholic Register: America's most complete
    Catholic news source. February 7, 2011
    <[http://www.ncregister.com/blog/archbishop-hilarion-on-christian-unity/](http://www.ncregister.com/blog/archbishop-hilarion-on-christian-unity/)\>
3.  [↑](#ref-2) Jeffrey Donovan. "World: Pope's Dream Of Uniting
    Christianity Goes Unfulfilled". Radio Free Europe Free Liberty.
    April 8, 2005.
    <[http://www.rferl.org/content/article/1058341.html](http://www.rferl.org/content/article/1058341.html)\>

## See also

-   [Eastern Orthodox Church](Eastern_Orthodox_Church "Eastern Orthodox Church")
-   [Roman Catholic Church](Roman_Catholic_Church "Roman Catholic Church")

## External links

-   [Byzantium: The Great Schism By Bsp. Kallistos Ware](http://www.fatheralexander.org/booklets/english/history_timothy_ware_1.htm#n4)
-   [Catholic Encyclopedia article](http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/13535a.htm)



