**Cage Stage Calvinism** is a humorous term used to warn Christian
believers recently converted to Calvinistic Theology. It suggests
that the new Calvinist would be best placed in a cage rather than
cause undue offence due to their zealous promotion of a Calvinistic
theology.

The term has been used by well known authors such as Doug Wilson,
RC Sproul, Jr and CJ Mahaney.

[James White](James_White "James White") (of Alpha and Omega
Ministries) comments:-

"I've seen it many times. The Cage Stage. A believer's eyes are
opened to the majesty of God as the sovereign King of the universe,
and their entire life is turned upside down. And for a while, they
have more zeal than they have knowledge. We call it the "cage
stage." That period in the experience of the new Calvinist where
they would be better off kept in a cage until they can gain enough
maturity to handle these vitally important topics aright. That time
when they are more likely to hurt themselves, and others! You know,
when they are all running around smacking someone upside the head
with Pink's The Sovereignty of God?" ^[[1]](#note-0)^

Pastor John Samson in an article entitled 'Understanding Free Will'
^[[2]](#note-1)^ comments:-

"Well, it could be that some reformed and crazed individual has put
a gun to your head and told you that if you did not read this
article he would shoot you. He would definitely be what I, and
others refer to as a cage-stage Calvinist. When after coming to
understand the doctrines of grace, for a period of a couple of
years or so, some people need to be locked up in a cage. That would
be the best thing for everyone! Zeal for reformational truth needs
to be augmented with sanity in human relations! A cage-stage
Calvinist sends books, tapes, CD's, DVD's, and e-mails to all
unsuspecting victims, regardless of whether or not they have ever
shown an interest in these things. Christmas is the favorite time
of the year for someone in this condition for they've been eagerly
waiting for this excuse/opportunity to send R. C. Sproul's book
"Chosen by God" to everyone they know. They are on a mission
alright, but the best thing would be for them to cool down for a
couple of years in a cage!"

## References

1.  [↑](#ref-0)
    [How to Avoid Cage-Stage-itis by James White](http://www.aomin.org/aoblog/index.php?itemid=2269&catid=4)
2.  [↑](#ref-1)
    [Understanding Free Will by Pastor John Samson](http://www.reformationtheology.com/2005/12/understanding_free_will_by_pas_1.php)

## External links

Dr James N. McGuire, 'A Kinder, Gentler Calvinism' -
[http://rq.rts.edu/summer00/mcguire.html](http://rq.rts.edu/summer00/mcguire.html)



