[![Broom icon.png](images/thumb/9/90/Broom_icon.png/30px-Broom_icon.png.pagespeed.ce.3MDzK_R-j-.png)](http://www.theopedia.com/File:Broom_icon.png)
**This article or section may require cleanup to meet Theopedia's *[quality standards](http://www.theopedia.com/Theopedia:Writing_guide "Theopedia:Writing guide")*.**  
Please discuss this issue on the
[talk page](http://www.theopedia.com/Talk:Child_bearing "Talk:Child bearing")
or [replace this tag](index.php?title=Child_bearing&action=edit)
with a more specific message. Help:
[How to Contribute](http://www.theopedia.com/Help:How_to_contribute "Help:How to contribute").{{\#if:November
2004|  
This article/section has been tagged since **November 2004**.|}}
**Childbearing** means to conceive, carry, and bring forth children
from the womb.

## Scriptures concerning the bearing of children (KJV)

"To the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy
conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children: and thy
desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee."
Genesis 3:16

Eve said, "I have gotten a man from the Lord." Genesis 4:1

"And Adam knew his wife again; and she bare a son, and called his
name Seth: 'For God,' said [Eve], 'hath appointed me another seed
instead of Abel, whom Cain slew.'" Genesis 4:25

"I will bless her and surely give you a son by her. I will bless
her so that she will be the mother of nations; kings of peoples
will come from her." Genesis 17:16

"And the LORD visited Sarah as he had said, and the LORD did unto
Sarah as he had spoken. For Sarah conceived, and bare Abraham a son
in his old age, at the set time of which God had spoken to him."
Genesis 21:1-2

"And Isaac intreated the LORD for his wife, because she was barren:
and the LORD was intreated of him, and Rebekah his wife conceived."
Genesis 25:21

"And Leah conceived, and bare a son, and she called his name
Reuben: for she said, 'Surely the LORD hath looked upon my
affliction; now therefore my husband will love me.' And she
conceived again, and bare a son; and said, 'Because the LORD hath
heard that I was hated, he hath therefore given me this son also':
and she called his name Simeon." Genesis 29:32-33

"And he lifted up his eyes, and saw the woman and the children, and
said, Who are those with thee? And he said, The children which God
hath graciously given to thy servant." Genesis 33:5

"Then the Lord your God will make you most prosperous in all the
work of your hands and in the fruit of your womb, the young of your
livestock and the crops of your land." Deuteronomy 30:9

"And God gave to Heman fourteen sons and three daughters." 1
Chronicles 25:5

"Obed-edom had eight sons "for God blessed him." 1 Chronicles
26:4-5

"Thine hands have made me and fashioned me together round about;
yet thou dost destroy me. Remember, I beseech thee, that thou hast
made me as the clay; and wilt thou bring me into dust again? Hast
thou not poured me out as milk, and curdled me like cheese? Thou
hast clothed me with skin and flesh, and hast fenced me with bones
and sinews." Job 10:8-11

"Did not he that made me in the womb make him? and did not one
fashion us in the womb?" Job 31:15

"He maketh the barren woman to keep house, and to be a joyful
mother of children. Praise ye the LORD." Psalm 113:9

"The LORD hath been mindful of us: he will bless us; he will bless
the house of Israel; he will bless the house of Aaron. He will
bless them that fear the LORD, both small and great. The LORD shall
increase you more and more, you and your children. Ye are blessed
of the LORD which made heaven and earth." Psalm 115:12-15

"Unless the Lord builds the house, it's builders labor in vain.
Unless the Lord watches over the city, the watchmen stand guard in
vain. In vain you rise early and stay up late, toiling for food to
eat- for he grants sleep to those he loves. Sons are a heritage
from the Lord, children a reward from him. Like arrows in the hands
of a warrior are son's born in one's youth. Blessed is the man
whose quiver is full of them. They will not be put to shame when
they contend with their enemies at the gate." Psalm 127

"Blessed are all who fear the Lord, who walk in his ways. You will
eat the fruit of your labor; blessings and prosperity will be
yours. Your wife will be like a fruitful vine within your house;
your sons will be like olive shoots around your table. Thus is the
man blessed who fears the Lord. May the Lord bless you from Zion
all the days of your life; may you see the prosperity of Jerusalem,
and may you live to see your children's children. Peace be upon
Israel." Psalm 128

"For you created my inmost being; you knit me together in my
mother's womb. I praise you because I am fearfully and wonderfully
made; your works are wonderful, I know that full well. My frame was
not hidden from you when I was made in the secret place. When I was
woven together in the depths of the earth, your eyes saw my
unformed body. All the days ordained for me were written in your
book before one of them came to me." Psalm 138:13-16

"Children's children are the crown of old men; and the glory of
children are their fathers." Proverbs 17:6

"As thou knowest not what is the way of the spirit, nor how the
bones do grow in the womb of her that is with child: even so thou
knowest not the works of God who maketh all." Ecclesiastes 11:5

"The word of the Lord came to me saying, "Before I formed you in
the womb I knew you, before you were born I set you apart; I
appointed you as a prophet to the nations." Jeremiah 1:4-5

"From them will come songs of thanksgiving and the sound of
rejoicing. I will add to their numbers, and they will not be
decreased; I will bring them honor, and they will not be
disdained." Jeremiah 30:19

"And did not he make one? Yet had he the residue of the spirit. And
wherefore one? That he might seek a godly seed. Therefore take heed
to your spirit, and let none deal treacherously against the wife of
his youth." Malachi 2:15

"For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that
are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or
dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by
him, and for him:" Colossians 1:16

"Notwithstanding she shall be saved in childbearing, if they
continue in faith and charity and holiness with sobriety." 1
Timothy 2:15

"For every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if
it be received with thanksgiving:" 1 Timothy 4:4

"I will therefore that the younger women marry, bear children,
guide the house, give none occasion to the adversary to speak
reproachfully." 1 Timothy 5:14

"Through faith also Sara herself received strength to conceive
seed, and was delivered of a child when she was past age, because
she judged him faithful who had promised." Hebrews 11:11

## Quotes on Childbearing

"Maternity is a glorious thing since all mankind has been
conceived, born, and nourished of women. All human laws should
encourage the multiplication of families." *Martin Luther*

"Hence note, 'tis one of the greatest outward blessings to have a
family full of dutiful children. To have many children is the next
blessing to much grace. To have many children about us is better
than to have much wealth about us. To have store of these olive
plants (as the Psalmist calls them) round about our table is better
than to have store of oil and wine upon our table. We know the
worth of dead, or rather, lifeless treasures, but who knows the
worth of living treasures?...But though all things are of God, yet
all things are not alike of him: children are more of God than
houses or lands." *David Caryl*



