[![image](images/f/f8/Mary_baker_eddy.png)](http://www.theopedia.com/File:Mary_baker_eddy.png)
Mary Baker Eddy, founder of Christian Science
**Christian Science** is a religion "emphasizing divine healing as
practiced by Jesus Christ." It is officially known as The Church of
Christ, Scientist (CCS) with headquarters in Boston, Massachusetts,
founded in 1879 by Mary Baker Eddy (1821-1910).

## Contents

-   [1 Background](#Background)
-   [2 Biographical sketch of Mary Baker Eddy](#Biographical_sketch_of_Mary_Baker_Eddy)
-   [3 Doctrine](#Doctrine)
-   [4 Bibliography](#Bibliography)

## Background

In the nineteenth century, America was not surprised to hear of a
new religious movement starting. It was a time of new revelations
and rebellion toward the church. A religious group that came out of
this century was a movement known as **Christian Science**. The
founder of the movement, Mary Baker Eddy, carried views and beliefs
that drew people away from their orthodox beliefs to a new way of
living. Here we will see how the Christian Science group came to
being, explore their theology, and their reasoning behind it. In
addition, we will show how the group is flawed in the doctrine and
teachings they hold to.

During the nineteenth century there was a swell of health problems
in America. Women were coming down with a disease that they called
“hysteria” and men similarly developed a syndrome termed “nervous
exhaustion.” Medicine throughout this time period mostly did more
harm than it did good. Doctors raced to find cures for these
sicknesses but found themselves unsuccessful a majority of the
time. Health centers would even try to cure the illness by giving
them medicine that was similar to the actual sickness they had by
mesmerism or the technical term for this practice, Homeopathy. The
middle class dealt with this more than any other class and sought
to find a solution to this health epidemic.

## Biographical sketch of Mary Baker Eddy

Mary Baker Eddy founded Christian Science. Born to Mary Morse Baker
in Bow, New Hampshire in 1821, she was the last of six children of
Mark Baker and Abigail Ambrose Baker. Her father was a devout
Congregationalist and carried very strict
[Calvinistic](Calvinism "Calvinism") teaching. As a child, she was
frequently ill with fever which confined her to bed for days and
kept her from regular school attendance. Eddy is said to have been
"domineering, quarrelsome, and extremely self-centered." (Meyer,
1961) At age 22, she married George Washington Glover, and they
moved to Wilmington, North Carolina. He died seven months later in
the yellow fever epidemic. Penniless and pregnant, Mary returned to
her parent's home where her first and only child was born. She fell
ill, and with no money, the child was sent to live with others.
This family moved to the then 'far West' and she was told he'd
died. She met this child for the first time thirty years later. In
1853 she married Dr. Daniel Patterson, a traveling dentist and
homeopathist. His practice failed, and he went to fight in the
Civil War. Their marriage eventually ended in divorce because of
his infidelity and desertion(1877) . Subsequently in 1862, while
suffering from several illnesses, Eddy visited a man named Phineas
Quimby. Quimby operated out of Portland, Maine and he taught a
system of healing the focused on the mind. He taught that the mind
had the power to heal the body. He exerted a significant influence
on her thinking regarding spiritual matters. In fact, Quimby had
cured several infirmities that Baker had but that did not stop her
from the events that were soon to unfold in her life.

In January, 1866 , Quimby died. Then, on February first, Mary took
an arduous fall on the ice and was significantly injured, not
expecting to recover. Yet as this founding event unearthed, she
read a passage from Matthew chapter nine verse two, “Some men
brought to him a paralytic, lying on a mat. When Jesus saw their
faith, he said to the paralytic, ‘Take heart, son; your sins are
forgiven.’” After three days she was miraculously cured. The fall
and cure then brought Eddy to her conversion with new knowledge.

Subsequent to her conversion she moved to Lynn, Massachusetts and
opened her own mental healing clinic. Then in 1875 at the age of
45, she published her first edition of "Science and Health with Key
to the Scriptures". She claimed it was the final revelation of God
to mankind and asserted that her work was inspired of God. The word
"Key" in the title of her book is in reference to her being the
woman of Revelation 12; that she is the key to unlocking the Bible,
which she called a “dark book.” Eddy claimed the Bible had many
mistakes and that her writings provided the "Key" spoken of in Rev.
3:7.

Mary then married a student of hers, Asa Eddy, and her name became
Mary Baker Eddy. Then in 1879 her church was organized and was
titled “Church of Christ (Science).” Following the foundation of
the church a metaphysical college was started to train Christian
Science leaders and then in 1910, Eddy died, not fully cured of her
own infections.

## Doctrine

The history of Mary Eddy gave way to the essential doctrine that
the Christian Science church taught and still teaches today. The
core theology they hold to is the rejection of medicine and the
belief in the mortal mind. With the rejection of medicine,
Christian Science followers developed an intricate system to help
heal apart from use of medication.

On the first level of this system are the practitioners. These are
the lay people, or the regular Congregationalists that have taken
classes and been ordained as healers. Second are the teachers who
gain their statues by obtaining a license from the church. Finally
there are the readers. These people read the lessons in church
services and are usually made up by a male and a female together.
They also are the librarians of the reading rooms that one could
currently find in most cities. Together, these people make up the
church positions.

Christian Scientists believe that by simply reading Eddy’s book,
“Science and Health” one can be healed of the their sicknesses or
diseases. Eddy assumed this to be the key to healing because when
she had fallen on the ice and was healed by reading Matthew 9:2,
then healing could occur for all people. In some cases, though, it
was necessary to see a doctor. If someone broke a bone and had to
get it set, then seeing a doctor would be best, or if one needed
glasses, they should go to an eye physician to get glasses. Yet, a
Christian Science member must do this with great discernment.

According to Eddy and the Christian Science affiliates, something
was desperately wrong with the world. With suffering, illness, and
death taking place in the world around them, there had to be some
cause. This error, as they properly call it, is purely human and it
is caused by a false belief of the world around them. This false
principle, states that matter or the material world, is real. If
the material world is false, then the spiritual world is reality.
The mind and the spirit can carry what is real but the fleshly
things cannot. However to achieve salvation, he or she needs only
to find the true reality of understanding, as revealed in Christian
Science teachings. Health and Science states, "It is contrary to
Christian Science to suppose that life is either material or
organically spiritual" (Eddy, 83:21-22)

Moreover, between many of the biblically based movements in America
today, Christian Science is one of the most interesting. Not only
does it deny the essential doctrines of Christianity, but it also
has completely reinterpreted the Bible. It radically redefines the
Bible’s culture and terminology as well as cleaves thousands of
scriptures out of their historical and biblical contexts. The
result is a non-Christian mixture of metaphysical and philosophical
thoughts, much like the Buddhist of the east. Christian Science is
so foreign to the Western thought that, if it did not use words
like Jesus, Trinity, Love, Grace, Sin, etc., you’d never suspect it
had anything to do with the Bible at all. In fact it is so
different, that it absolutely rejects the substitutionary atonement
of Jesus and states that it had no successful value. (See Science
and Health 25:6)

The Christian Scientists regard their viewpoint to be concurrent
with the original teachings of Jesus. They even go as far as to
consider truth a matter of higher understanding and learning. Mary
Baker Eddy died a millionaire from her position in the church and
will continue to affect the Christian Science by her writings.

## Bibliography

Conkin, Paul, *American Originals*. U. of North Carolina Press,
1997

Eddy, Mary Baker, *Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures*.

F. E. Meyer, *The Religious Bodies of America*. Concordia
Publishing House, Saint Louis, Missouri. 1961. P. 532.



