**Christian views (attitudes and beliefs) about women** vary
considerably today and have varied even more throughout the last
two millennia, evolving along with or counter to the societies in
which Christians have lived. All of the major world religions,
including institutionalized Christianity, deprecate women to some
degree.^[[1]](#note-0)^ Since the first century, organized
[Christianity](Christianity "Christianity") has interpreted the
[Bible](Bible "Bible") as prescribing a gender-based hierarchy,
claimed up to the present by
[Complementarians](Complementarianism "Complementarianism") and
traditionalists to be scripturally mandated. The hierarchical
theology has placed woman under the man's authority — in the
church, in marriage, and elsewhere. Historically, it has excluded
women from church leadership positions that give women any kind of
authority over men.

Only since the 1970s have more moderate views emerged. Today they
are known as the
[Christian Egalitarianism](Egalitarianism "Egalitarianism") and
[Complementarianism](Complementarianism "Complementarianism") views
of women and men.

## Contents

-   [1 Christian Egalitarians](#Christian_Egalitarians)
-   [2 Complementarians](#Complementarians)
-   [3 Women's roles in the early Christian Church](#Women.27s_roles_in_the_early_Christian_Church)
    -   [3.1 Trinitarian analogy to the male/female relationship](#Trinitarian_analogy_to_the_male.2Ffemale_relationship)

-   [4 Jesus' views of women](#Jesus.27_views_of_women)
-   [5 Endnotes](#Endnotes)
-   [6 Literature on the history of women in the early Christian Church](#Literature_on_the_history_of_women_in_the_early_Christian_Church)
-   [7 External links](#External_links)

### Christian Egalitarians

Their interpretation of scripture brings them to the conclusion
that the manner and teaching of Jesus, affirmed by the Apostle
Paul, abolished gender-specific roles in both the church and
marriage. One verse in particular is seen by Christian Egalitarians
as a "fanfare of freedom" for what historically have been three
oppressed groups: racial minorities, slaves, and women. This verse
has been called by some the "Magna Carta of spiritual
emancipation."^[[2]](#note-1)^

> **There is neither Jew nor Greek, slave nor free, male nor female, for you are all one in Christ Jesus.**—Galatians
> 3:28

Christian Egalitarians take that verse at face value, understanding
it to acknowledge the elaborate system of inequalities existing
since shortly after the Creation.They believe that Jesus Christ
abolished those discriminatory systems for all eternity. They
consider the verse's phrase "all one in Christ Jesus" to say that
within his church, **"in Christ,"** is the one sanctuary or
protected place where there are no longer any secondary
distinctions of race, national origin, slavery, or gender. They
conclude that a true benefit of being a Christian, then, is that
all are **one** "in Christ."

### Complementarians

Complementarians, also known as Traditionalists or
Hierarchicalists, interpret Galatians 3:28 differently from
Christian Egalitarians. They understand it to refer only to equal
availability of everyone to *salvation.* They claim that the
freedoms offered in Christ do not apply to male-preference in
marriage, the ordination of women, racism, or any other form of
discrimination.

Complementarians believe the overarching views of both Old and New
Testaments do prescribe a male-priority based hierarchy and gender
roles in the church, in marriage, and elsewhere. These prescribed
gender roles only recently have come to be ameliorated by some
Complementarians as being "equal but different." Male priority
still exists as a requirement of scripture, they say, but the two
genders are now described as having "complementary" roles in the
church and home.

## Women's roles in the early Christian Church

From the beginning of the early Christian church, starting with
Jesus, women were important members of the movement. The gospels of
the New Testament often mention Jesus speaking to women publicly
and openly against the social norms of the time. He reached out to
the marginalized in his society and thus, his appeal was great. He
had female followers who were his sponsors and Mary Magdalene is
recorded to be the first person to have the privilege of seeing
Jesus after resurrection. As time went on and the disciples
continued to spread Jesus' message by word of mouth, groups of
Christians organized within the homes of believers. Those who could
offer their home for meetings were considered important within the
movement and assumed leadership roles.^[[3]](#note-2)^

By the time Paul began his missionary movement, women were
important agents within the different cities. The Pauline letters
mention women such as Chloe, Priscilla (Prisca), Euodia and
Syntyche as well as Phoebe.

Chloe, a prominent woman of Corinth, appears to be the head of a
household of an extended family. She and her household told Paul of
the divisions in the congregation of Corinth.(1 Cor. 1:11)

Priscilla is mentioned seven times in the Bible, as a missionary
partner with the Apostle Paul and the wife of
[Aquila](index.php?title=Aquila_(Bible)&action=edit&redlink=1 "Aquila (Bible) (page does not exist)").
Out of seven times
[Priscilla and Aquila](Priscilla_and_Aquila "Priscilla and Aquila")
are mentioned as a couple, her name appears before Aquila's five
times.

Phoebe, another woman mentioned in Pauline letters, He attaches to
her three titles: *diakonos* meaning a deacon (lit. "servant")
sister, and *prostasis* meaning leader and president. There is no
difference when the title of the deacon is used for Phoebe and
Timothy. The office of the deacon eventually became mainly
associated with women and their close work with the poor.

Outside of written religious sources there is also objective
evidence to support women's prominent status and roles within the
early Christian church. A second century letter of a Roman
governor, Pliny the Younger, to Roman emperor Trajan, demonstrates
that female servants were leaders in a church in Bythnia. Pliny
wrote the letter, dated 112 C.E., asking for advice on how he
should handle a situation where Christians were said to have been
stirring up trouble. He said he captured and tortured two female
maidservants called *deaconesses*. These women must have been
considered important church leaders since the term was similarly
applied to Phoebe in the Pauline letters.^[[4]](#note-3)^

Art has also been an important objective source showing women in
leadership roles. The first or early second century fresco called
*Fractio Panis* depicts a Eucharist ceremony. All the participants,
including the main person who is performing the ceremony, are
women.^[[5]](#note-4)^ A mosaic found in a Roman basilica portrays
Mary, two saints and a veiled woman. An inscription states that the
veiled woman is *Theodora Epicopa* which means *Bishop* Theodora,
*Epicopa* being the Latin feminine term for bishop. On a Greek
island called Thera, a commemorative inscription has been
discovered on a burial site. It named Epiktas, a female name, as a
priest.^[[6]](#note-5)^

### Trinitarian analogy to the male/female relationship

Some complementarians understand the Trinity to present an analogy
to the male/female relationship, as God designed it. God is one in
essence and three in persons. The three persons of the God-head are
absolutely equal in essence (in fact, they each share fully,
simultaneously and without division the one divine essence), but
they are distinct in function. Specifically, their distinction of
function is marked by an intrinsic relation of authority within the
God-head, by which the Son is subject to the Father, and the Spirit
to the Son. 1 Cor. 11:3 states part of this: "God is the head of
Christ." The clearest biblical example of Christ's subjection to
the Father is in 1 Cor. 15:28 where the exalted and victorious Son
"will also be subject to the One who subjected all things to Him."
Given this understanding of the Trinity, it makes sense for Paul to
say what He does in 1 Cor. 11:3. He speaks here of three authority
lines that exist: Christ is the authority (head) over every man,
man is the authority (head) over a woman, and God (the Father) is
authority (head) over Christ. Just as the persons of God are equal
in essence and yet they relate within a structure of lines of
authority, so too men and women are equal in essence while relating
within a similar structure of lines of authority.

## Jesus' views of women

According to the Gospel accounts, Jesus went far beyond the customs
and outlook of his environment by not conforming to the cultural
mentality unfavorable to women. Instead, he reacted against
inequalities based on sexual differences by calling women to follow
him.^[[7]](#note-6)^

## Endnotes

1.  [↑](#ref-0)
    [http://www.sacred-texts.com/wmn/index.htm](http://www.sacred-texts.com/wmn/index.htm)
    Women and Religion index page
2.  [↑](#ref-1) Chuck Missler. Koinonia House Online.
    [http://www.khouse.org/articles/2000/285/](http://www.khouse.org/articles/2000/285/)
3.  [↑](#ref-2) Margaret MacDonald, "Reading Real Women Through
    Undisputed Letters of Paul" in Women and Christian Origins, ed. by
    Ross Sheppard Kraemer and Mary Rose D'Angelo (Oxford: University
    Press, 1999), 204
4.  [↑](#ref-3) Daniel L. Hoffman,
    *The Status of Women and Gnosticism in Irenaeus and Tertullian.*
    (New York: E. Mellen Press, 1995), 81.
5.  [↑](#ref-4) Hoffman, 83
6.  [↑](#ref-5) Karen Jo Torjesen,
    *When Women Were Priests: Women's Leadership in the Early Church & The Scandal of their Subordination in the Rise of Christianity*
    (New York, NY: Harper Collins Publisher, 1995),10
7.  [↑](#ref-6)
    [http://www.vatican.va/holy\_father/john\_paul\_ii/audiences/alpha/data/aud19940727en.html](http://www.vatican.va/holy_father/john_paul_ii/audiences/alpha/data/aud19940727en.html)
    *Women and the Ministerial Priesthood.* General Audience—July 27,
    1994\>

## Literature on the history of women in the early Christian Church

-   Torjesen, Karen Jo.
    *When Women were Priests: Women's Leadership in the Early Church & The Scandal of their Subordination in the Rise of Christianity.*
    New York, NY: Harper Collins Publisher, 1995.
-   Wiley,Tatha. *Paul and the Gentile Women: Reframing Galatians*
    New York: Continuum, 2005.
-   MacDonald, Margaret. "Reading Real Women Through Undisputed
    Letters of Paul." In *Women and Christian Origins* edited by Ross
    Sheppard Kraemer and Mary Rose D'Angelo. Oxford: University Press,
    1999.
-   Witherington, Ben III. *Women in the Earliest Churches.*
    Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press, 1988.

## External links

-   [Christians for Biblical Equality, an egalitarian organization](http://www.cbeinternational.org)
-   [The Council for Biblical Manhood and Womanhood, a complementarian organization](http://www.cbmw.org/)
-   ["The Ministry of Women" — by William MacDonald](http://www.plymouthbrethren.org/page.php?page_id=511)



