The **Church of England** is the officially established Christian
church in England and acts as the mother and senior province of the
worldwide [Anglican Communion](Anglicanism "Anglicanism") as well
as a founding member of the
[Porvoo Communion](http://www.porvoochurches.org/), an association
of mostly Anglican and Lutheran churches in Europe.

## Contents

-   [1 Theology and sociology](#Theology_and_sociology)
-   [2 Governance and administration](#Governance_and_administration)
-   [3 History](#History)
-   [4 Related churches](#Related_churches)

## Theology and sociology

The Church of England considers itself to stand both in a
[Reformed church](Reformed_church "Reformed church") tradition
(current English law regards it as
[Protestant](Protestantism "Protestantism")) and in a Catholic (but
not [Roman Catholic](Roman_Catholicism "Roman Catholicism")) church
tradition: *Reformed* insofar as many of the principles of the
[Reformation](Reformation "Reformation") have influenced it and
insofar as it does not accept Papal authority; Catholic in that it
views itself as the unbroken continuation of the early apostolic
and later medieval "universal church" rather than as a new
formation. In its practices, furthermore, the Church of England
remains closer to Roman Catholicism than most Protestant Churches.
It holds many relatively conservative theological beliefs, its
liturgical form of worship can feature tradition and ceremony, and
its organization embodies a belief in apostolic succession through
the historical [episcopal](Episcopalian "Episcopalian") hierarchy
of archbishops, bishops, and dioceses.

In many people's eyes, however, the Church of England has as its
primary distinguishing mark its breadth and open-mindedness. In
addition to the traditional mainstream, the church has long
included "high church" and "low church" factions with their own
particular preferences. Today, practices range from those of the
Anglo-Catholics, who emphasize liturgy and sacraments, to the far
less ceremonial services of
[Evangelicals](Evangelicalism "Evangelicalism") and
[Charismatics](Charismatic "Charismatic"). But this "broad church"
faces various contentious doctrinal questions raised by the
development of modern society, such as conflicts over the
ordination of women as priests (accepted in 1992 and begun in 1994)
and the status of noncelibate
[homosexual](Homosexuality "Homosexuality") clergy (still unsettled
today). In July 2005 the divisions were once again apparent as the
General Synod voted to "set in train" the process of allowing the
ordination of women as bishops, scheduling debate on the specific
legislation for February 2006.

## Governance and administration

The British monarch (at present, Elizabeth II), has the
constitutional title of "Supreme Governor of the Church of
England". In practice, however, the effective leadership falls to
the Archbishop of Canterbury. The worldwide Anglican Communion of
independent national or regional churches recognises the Archbishop
of Canterbury as a kind of symbolic leader.
[Rowan Williams](Rowan_Williams "Rowan Williams") has served as
Archbishop of Canterbury since February 27th, 2003.

The Church of England has a legislative body, the General Synod.
However, fundamental legislation still has to pass through the UK
Parliament. The church has its own judicial branch, known as the
Ecclesiastical courts, which likewise form a part of the UK court
system.

In addition to England proper, the jurisdiction of the Church of
England extends to the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands. In
recent years, expatriate congregations on the continent of Europe
have become the Diocese in Europe.

## History

The Church of England traces its formal corporate history from the
597 mission by Augustine of Canterbury, stresses its continuity and
identity with the primitive universal Western church, and notes the
consolidation of its particular independent and national character
in the post-[Reformation](Reformation "Reformation") events of
Tudor England.

Christianity arrived in Britain in the first or second centuries
and existed independently of the Church of Rome, as did many other
Christian communities of that era. Records note British bishops as
attending the Council of Arles in 314. The Pope sent Augustine of
Canterbury from Rome in the 6th century to evangelise the Angles
(597). With the help of Christians already residing in Kent, he
established his church in Canterbury, the capital of Kent, and
became the first in the series of archbishops of Canterbury.

Simultaneously, the Celtic Church of St.Columba continued to
evangelise Scotland. The Celtic Church of North Britain submitted
in some sense to the authority of Rome at the Council of Whitby in
644. Over the next few centuries, the Roman system introduced by
Augustine gradually absorbed the pre-existing Celtic Christian
churches.

England remained a Catholic country for a thousand years, but then
separated itself from Rome in 1534 during the reign of King Henry
VIII, though it briefly rejoined Rome during the reign of Queen
Mary I in 1555.

## Related churches

In Scotland, the [Presbyterian](Presbyterian "Presbyterian") Church
of Scotland serves as the established church, but a smaller
Anglican church exists, known as the Scottish Episcopal Church.

The Church in Wales underwent disestablishment in 1920 and became
an independent member of the Anglican Communion.

The Church of Ireland had official established church status in
Ireland until 1871, although the bulk of the Irish people in
practice remained mostly Roman Catholic.

The Church of England stands in full communion with the other
provinces in the [Anglican Communion](Anglicanism "Anglicanism")
and separately with the other signatories of the Porvoo Communion.



