**Classifying the attributes of God** has been a topic of
discussion for quite some time. [Reformed](Reformed "Reformed")
theology has historically distinguished between "Incommunicable"
and "Communicable"
[attributes of God](Attributes_of_God "Attributes of God").
Incommunicable has been understood as attributes that *only*
[God](God "God") has, while Communicable attributes are those that
humans possess to a degree.

For example, God's attribute of love can be seen in humanity. Thus,
"love" is considered a communicable attribute. Yet, God's eternity
is not communicable as we are creatures who had a beginning and
live in time and space.

## Critique

Yet, some have been critical of these distinctions. Donald Macleod
notes that,

None of these [classifications] has much to commend it and
certainly none is to be regarded as authoritative. Scripture
nowhere attempts a classification... All the suggested
classifications are artificial and misleading, not least that which
has been most favoured by Reformed theologians - the division into
communicable and incommunicable attributes. The problem here is
that these qualities we refer to as incommunicable adhere
unalterably to those we refer to as communicable. For example, God
is "infinite, eternal and unchangeable" (The Shorter Catechism,
Answer 4) and these are deemed to be incommunicable properties: and
God is merciful, which is deemed to be a communicable property. But
the mercy itself is "infinite, eternal and unchangeable" and as
such is incommunicable. The same is true of all the other so-called
communicable attributes such as the love, righteousness and
faithfulness of God. One the other hand, to speak of omnipotence,
omniscience and omnipresence as incommunicable is equally
unsatisfactory. If we remove the prefix omni we are left simply
with power, knowledge and presence, all of which have analogies in
our own human existence. (*Behold Your God*, p. 20-21)
However, [Louis Berkhof](Louis_Berkhof "Louis Berkhof") justified
his use of these categories, saying that,

if we... remember that none of the attributes of God are
incommunicable in the sense that there is no trace of them in man,
and none of them are communicable in the sense that they are found
in man as they are found in God, we see no reason why we should
depart from the old division which has become so familiar in
Reformed theology. (*Systematic Theology*, p. 55-56).
*This article is a **[stub](http://www.theopedia.com/Category:Theopedia_stubs "Category:Theopedia stubs")**. Please edit it to add information.*
## See also

-   [Attributes of God](Attributes_of_God "Attributes of God")



