Clement I, the bishop of Rome also called **Clement of Rome** and
Clemens Romanus, is considered one of the
[Apostolic Fathers](Apostolic_Fathers "Apostolic Fathers").

Liber Pontificalis believes that Clement of Rome had personally
known [Peter](Peter "Peter"), and states that he wrote two letters
(the second letter, 2 Clement is no longer ascribed to Clement) and
that he died in Greece in the third year of Trajan's reign, or 100.
A 9th century tradition says he was martyred in the Crimea in 102,
tied to a ship's anchor and thrown overboard to drown, but earlier
sources say he died a natural death. The Vatican's "Annuario
Pontificio" (2003) cites a reign from 92 to 99. He is commemorated
on November 23.

Some [Catholics](Catholicism "Catholicism") believe that Clement
was the fourth Pope, and claim this as evidence for the
[papacy](Papacy "Papacy") we see today within the Roman Catholic
Church.

## Writings

Clement is perhaps best known by a letter to the Church in Corinth,
often called 1 Clement. This was most likely written in 96, and
"most likely directed against immoral practices of prostitution
connected with the Temple of Aphrodite. In the letter, Clement
expresses his dissatisfaction with events taking place in the
Corinthian Church and asks the people to repent for their
unchristian ways."
[[1]](http://www2.evansville.edu/ecoleweb/glossary/clementr.html)

A second epistle, better described as a homily and written in the
second century, has been traditionally ascribed to Clement, but
recent scholarship discredits his authorship.

## External links

-   [1 Clement](http://www.earlychristianwritings.com/1clement.html)
-   [*Catholic Encyclopedia*:](http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/04012c.htm)
    Clement I



