aliases:
- Lord's_Supper
---
**Communion**, also called **the Lord's Supper** in many Protestant
denominations, or **the Eucharist** in the more liturgical
churches, is one of the two [sacraments](Sacraments "Sacraments")
specifically instituted by Christ in the New Testament, the other
being [Baptism](Baptism "Baptism").

Jesus instituted this ordinance with his disciples at the Last
Passover on the eve of his arrest. This event is specifically
recorded in Luke 22:14-23 with Jesus saying "do this in remembrance
of me." (22:19) The remembrance is to be of Christ's person and
work, specifically his sacrificial death on the cross. This
ordinance is a sign of God's grace whereby:

-   Jesus gave his body and blood for our sins (Luke 22:19-20),
-   he entered into a covenant with us (Luke 22:20, 1 Cor 11:25),
    and
-   he joined us into one body, his church (1 Cor 10:16).

The
[Westminster Confession](Westminster_Confession "Westminster Confession")
defines it in this manner: "Our Lord Jesus, in the night wherein He
was betrayed, instituted the [sacrament](Sacraments "Sacraments")
of His body and blood, called the **Lord's Supper**, to be observed
in His Church, unto the end of the world, for the perpetual
remembrance of the sacrifice of Himself in
[His death](Atonement_of_Christ "Atonement of Christ"); the sealing
all benefits thereof unto true believers, their spiritual
nourishment and growth in Him, their further engagement in and to
all duties which they owe unto Him; and, to be a bond and pledge of
their communion with Him, and with each other, as members of His
mystical body." (WCF, 29.1).

## Contents

-   [1 Historical positions](#Historical_positions)
    -   [1.1 Luther](#Luther)
    -   [1.2 Zwingli](#Zwingli)
    -   [1.3 Calvin](#Calvin)

-   [2 See also](#See_also)
-   [3 External links](#External_links)

## Historical positions

### Luther

Luther's position (particularly as developed by subsequent
[Lutheranism](Lutheranism "Lutheranism")) is referred to as a "real
physical presence" of Christ in the elements. The bread is still
bread, but it is also truly the body of Christ. And while the wine
does not lose its "wine-ness", it is very much the actual blood of
Christ. Luther found Jesus' words "This is my body" (Hoc est corpus
meum) as a mandate for such an understanding. This view is often
conflated with
[consubstantiation](Consubstantiation "Consubstantiation"), which
is a *philosophical* rather than a *theological* view.

### Zwingli

The position associated with Zwingli is sometimes referred to as
the memorialist position, or the "real absence" view. That might be
somewhat misleading: everyone agrees that the Supper is to be a
memorial of Christ's death and resurrection. The question is
whether it is more than that. While most modern evangelicals
suggest, at least in practice, that it is not - Zwingli does seem
to have some place for the notion of a spiritual feeding of Christ.
Ultimately though, both he and Oecolampadius rejected Luther's
position at Marburg because they saw it as a threat to the validity
of Christ's resurrection and ascension - if Christ was physically
resurrected in body, that body cannot be in two places at once (ie.
at the right hand of the Father and in the bread/wine). To argue
that it could, as Luther did, seemed to challenge the physical
nature of Christ's resurrection.

### Calvin

Calvin's understanding would emerge after that of Luther and
Zwingli, but attempted to offer somewhat of a middle ground. He
drew heavily on [Augustinian](Augustine "Augustine") definitions of
the nature of sacraments, arguing that the Eucharist was a visible
sign of an invisible reality. So that while the bread is nothing
more than bread, it signifies and presents to us a spiritual
reality that takes place - a spiritual feeding on Christ by which
believers are nourished. Calvin sought to answer the question posed
by Zwingli (on how Christ could be in two places at once) by
proposing that at the Supper, Christians are taken into communion
with Christ in heaven by the Holy Spirit. So Christ is exclusively
present in body at the right hand of the Father. If that is
confusing to you, don't worry - Calvin himself admitted a level of
mystery, saying that he would rather experience the reality of the
Supper than understand it.

## See also

-   [Ordinances](index.php?title=Ordinances&action=edit&redlink=1 "Ordinances (page does not exist)")
-   [Sacraments](Sacraments "Sacraments")

## External links

-   [An overview of The Lord's Supper](http://www.graceonlinelibrary.org/etc/printer-friendly.asp?ID=367),
    by [Charles Hodge](Charles_Hodge "Charles Hodge")



