**Crucifixion** is an ancient method of execution, where the victim
was tied or nailed to a large wooden cross and left to hang there
until dead. It is widely considered a not uncommon and extremely
dishonorable and painful form of judicial execution in the Roman
Empire during the time of [Christ](Christ "Christ"), though similar
methods were employed in other ancient cultures such as Persia.

Crucifixion has special significance in Christianity, since
according to the [New Testament](New_Testament "New Testament"),
Jesus was crucified but later
[resurrected](Resurrection "Resurrection"). Because of this the
Christian *cross* or *crucifix* has become a main symbol of
Christianity.

*This article is a **[stub](http://www.theopedia.com/Category:Theopedia_stubs "Category:Theopedia stubs")**. Please edit it to add information.*
## Crucifixion in the Roman Empire

The Romans adopted the custom of crucifixion from Carthage, and
used it for slaves, rebels, pirates and especially-despised enemies
and criminals. Therefore crucifixion was considered a most
ignominious way to die. Condemned Roman citizens were usually
exempt from crucifixion (like feudal nobles from hanging) except
for major crimes against the state, such as high treason. The
Romans used it after the Third Servile War (the slave rebellion
under Spartacus), and during the Roman Civil War and the
destruction of [Jerusalem](Jerusalem "Jerusalem").

[Josephus](Josephus "Josephus") tells a story of the Romans
crucifying people along the walls of Jerusalem. He also says that
the Roman soldiers would amuse themselves by crucifying criminals
in different positions. In Roman-style crucifixion, the victim took
days to die slowly from suffocation—caused by the victim's
blood-supply slowly draining away, to a quantity insufficient to
supply the required oxygen to vital organs. The dead body was left
up for vultures and other birds to consume.

The goal of Roman crucifixion was not just to kill the criminal,
but also to mutilate and dishonour the body of the condemned. In
ancient tradition, an honourable death required burial; leaving a
body on the cross, so as to mutilate it and prevent its burial, was
a grave dishonour for the victim.

Under ancient Roman penal practice, crucifixion was not only a
means of execution, but also a means of exhibiting the criminal’s
low social status. It was the most dishonourable death imaginable.
The elite of Roman society (only about 10% of the population) were
almost never subject to corporal punishments; instead, they were
fined or exiled. Josephus mentions Jews of high rank who were
crucified, but this was to point out that their status had been
taken away from them. Control of one’s own body was vital in the
ancient world.
[Capital punishment](Capital_punishment "Capital punishment") took
away control over one’s own body, thereby implying a loss of status
and honour. The Romans often broke the prisoner's legs to hasten
death, and usually forbade burial.

A cruel prelude was scourging, which would cause the victim to lose
a large amount of blood, and approach a state of shock. The convict
then usually had to carry the horizontal beam (*patibulum* in
Latin) to the place of execution, but not necessarily the whole
cross. Crucifixion was typically carried out by specialized teams,
consisting of a commanding centurion and four soldiers. When it was
done in an established place of execution, the vertical beam
(*stipes*) could even be permanently embedded in the ground. The
victim was usually stripped naked -- the
[New Testament](New_Testament "New Testament")
[gospels](Gospel "Gospel"), dated to around the same time as
Josephus, describe soldiers gambling for the robes of Jesus.

Emperor Constantine, the first Emperor known to receive a Christian
[baptism](Baptism "Baptism"), abolished crucifixion in the Roman
Empire at the end of his reign.

## Further reading

-   [Martin Hengel](Martin_Hengel "Martin Hengel"), *Crucifixion*.
    Fortress, 1977.

## See also

-   [Jesus as the Suffering Servant](Jesus_as_the_Suffering_Servant "Jesus as the Suffering Servant")
-   [Calvary](Calvary "Calvary")



