*This article is a **[stub](http://www.theopedia.com/Category:Theopedia_stubs "Category:Theopedia stubs")**. Please edit it to add information.*
## The Text

### Matthew 25:31-46 ESV

[31] "When the Son of Man comes in his glory, and all the angels
with him, then he will sit on his glorious throne. [32] Before him
will be gathered all the nations, and he will separate people one
from another as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats. [33]
And he will place the sheep on his right, but the goats on the
left.  
[34] Then the King will say to those on his right, 'Come, you who
are blessed by my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from
the foundation of the world. [35] For I was hungry and you gave me
food, I was thirsty and you gave me drink, I was a stranger and you
welcomed me, [36] I was naked and you clothed me, I was sick and
you visited me, I was in prison and you came to me.' [37] Then the
righteous will answer him, saying, 'Lord, when did we see you
hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you drink? [38] And when
did we see you a stranger and welcome you, or naked and clothe you?
[39] And when did we see you sick or in prison and visit you?' [40]
And the King will answer them, 'Truly, I say to you, as you did it
to one of the least of these my brothers, you did it to me.'  
[41] "Then he will say to those on his left, 'Depart from me, you
cursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his
angels. [42] For I was hungry and you gave me no food, I was
thirsty and you gave me no drink, [43] I was a stranger and you did
not welcome me, naked and you did not clothe me, sick and in prison
and you did not visit me.' [44] Then they also will answer, saying,
'Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked
or sick or in prison, and did not minister to you?' [45] Then he
will answer them, saying, 'Truly, I say to you, as you did not do
it to one of the least of these, you did not do it to me.' [46] And
these will go away into eternal punishment, but the righteous into
eternal life."  

## External links

-   [The Sheep and the Goats](http://www.bible.org/page.asp?page_id=2279),
    by Hampton Keathley IV
-   [The Sheep & the Goats](http://www.monergism.com/thethreshold/articles/onsite/sheep_goats.html),
    by Charles Garland



