[![Broom icon.png](images/thumb/9/90/Broom_icon.png/30px-Broom_icon.png.pagespeed.ce.3MDzK_R-j-.png)](http://www.theopedia.com/File:Broom_icon.png)
**This article or section may require cleanup to meet Theopedia's *[quality standards](http://www.theopedia.com/Theopedia:Writing_guide "Theopedia:Writing guide")*.**  
Please discuss this issue on the
[talk page](http://www.theopedia.com/index.php?title=Talk:Pastor&action=edit&redlink=1 "Talk:Pastor (page does not exist)")
or [replace this tag](index.php?title=Pastor&action=edit) with a
more specific message. Help:
[How to Contribute](http://www.theopedia.com/Help:How_to_contribute "Help:How to contribute").{{\#if:|  
This article/section has been tagged since
**{{{1}}}**.[[Category:Cleanup from {{{1}}}]]|}}
'Pastor' is a common term used for a person who occupies a position
of leadership in a local church. Normally, the primary
responsibilities of this position involve preaching and personal
ministry to members of the congregation. In churches with more than
one staff member, it is not uncommon to have multiple pastors on
staff, each with a more narrowly defined set of responsibilities,
such as: youth pastor, adult ministries pastor, pastor of
visitation and so on. The word pastor most closely corresponds to
the word poimen in the New Testament, but there are other words
that denote this position. Some denominations have the tradition
that Pastors, Bishops (or Overseers), and Elders denote different
positions. This interpretation does not hold up to Biblical
scrutiny, however.

Bishops and pastors are not distinct from elders; the terms are
simply different ways of identifying the same people. The Greek
word for bishop is episkopos, from which the Episcopal Church gets
its name. The Greek word for pastor is poimen. The textual evidence
indicates that all three terms refer to the same office. The
qualifications for a bishop, listed in 1 Timothy 3:1-7, and those
for an elder, in Titus 1:6-9, are unmistakably parallel. In fact,
in Titus 1:5,7, Paul uses both terms to refer to the same man.

First Peter 5:1-2 brings all three terms together. Peter instructs
the elders to be good bishops as they pastor: "Therefore, I exhort
the elders [presbuteros] among you, as your fellow elder and
witness of the sufferings of Christ, and a partaker also of the
glory that is to be revealed, shepherd [pomaino] the flock of God
among you, exercising oversight [episkopeo] not under compulsion,
but voluntarily, according to the will of God."

Acts 20 also uses all three terms interchangeably. In verse 17,
Paul assembles all the elders [presbuteros] of the church to give
them his farewell message. In verse 28, he says, "Be on guard for
yourselves and for all the flock, among which the Holy Spirit has
made you overseers [episkopos], to shepherd [pomaino] the church of
God."

In general usage, the term elder may be preferred because it seems
to be free of many of the connotations and nuances of meanings that
have been imposed on both bishop and pastor by our culture.

Episkopos , the word for bishop, means "overseer," or "guardian."
The New Testament uses episkopos five times. In 1 Peter 2:25, Jesus
Christ is called the episkopos of our souls. That is, He is the One
who has the clearest overview of us, who understands us best, and
He is "the Shepherd and Guardian of [our] souls." The other four
uses of episkopos have reference to leaders in the church.

Episkopos is the secular Greek culture's equivalent to the historic
Hebrew idea of elders. Bishops were those appointed by the emperors
to lead captured or newly-founded city-states. The bishop was
responsible to the emperor, but oversight was delegated to him. He
functioned as a commissioner, regulating the affairs of the new
colony or acquisition.

Thus episkopos suggested two ideas to the first-century Greek mind:
responsibility to a superior power, and an introduction to a new
order of things. Gentile converts would immediately understand
those concepts in the term.

It is interesting to trace the biblical uses of episkopos. It
appears in the book of Acts only once, near the end (Acts 20:28).
Of course, at that time, there were relatively few Gentiles in the
church, and so the term was not commonly used. But apparently as
Gentiles were saved and the church began to lose its Jewish
orientation, the Greek culture's word episkopos was used more
frequently to describe those who functioned as elders (1 Timothy
3:1).

The New Testament bishop, or overseer, is in a unique leadership
role in the church, specifically responsible for teaching (1
Timothy 3:2), feeding, protecting, and generally nurturing the
flock (Acts 20:28). Biblically, there is no difference in the role
of an elder and that of a bishop; the two terms refer to the same
group of leaders. Episkopos emphasizes the function; presbuteros,
the character.

Poimen , the word for pastor, or shepherd, is used a number of
times in the New Testament, but Ephesians 4:11 is the only place in
the King James Version where it is translated "pastor." Every other
time it appears in the Greek texts, it is translated "shepherd" in
the English version.

Two of the three times it appears in the epistles, poimen refers to
Christ. Hebrews 13:20-21 is a benediction: "Now the God of peace,
who brought up from the dead the great Shepherd [poimen] of the
sheep through the blood of the eternal covenant, even Jesus our
Lord, equip you in every good thing to do His will." First Peter
2:25 says, "For you were continually straying like sheep, but now
you have returned to the Shepherd [poimen] and Guardian [episkopos]
of your souls."

In Ephesians 4:11, pastor [poimen] is used with the word teacher.
The Greek construction there indicates that the two terms go
together--we might hyphenate them in English ("pastor-teacher").
The emphasis is on the pastor's ministry of teaching.

Poimen , then, emphasizes the pastoral role of caring and feeding,
although the concept of leadership is also inherent in the picture
of a shepherd. The focus of the term poimen is on the man's
attitude. To be qualified as a pastor, a man must have a shepherd's
caring heart.

So the term elder emphasizes who the man is. Bishop speaks of what
he does. And pastor deals with how he feels. All three terms are
used of the same church leaders, and all three identify those who
feed and lead the church, but each has a unique emphasis.
^[[1]](#note-0)^

## Notes

1.  [â†‘](#ref-0)
    [Answering the Key Questions About Elders](http://www.gty.org/Resources/Positions/P11)



