[![image](images/0/0e/Vermigli.jpg)](http://www.theopedia.com/File:Vermigli.jpg)
[![image](data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAA8AAAALCAAAAACFLIiAAAAAAnRSTlMA/1uRIrUAAABPSURBVAjXY/j///+5vXDwjAHIr26ZAgXZe8H8a/+hoIcw/9nevdVL9+79DuPvzQYZFPUezu8BMZLXgkExnD8HAu6hqv//n+HZVjD4DuUDAKlChD3fj6aPAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC)](http://www.theopedia.com/File:Vermigli.jpg "Enlarge")
Peter Martyr Vermigli
**Peter Martyr Vermigli**, generally known as Peter Martyr
(1500-1562), was a [theologian](Theologian "Theologian") of the
Reformation period born in Florence, Italy.

Originally christened with the name Piero Mariano, he took the name
Peter Martyr when he was ordained into the Augustinian order after
[St. Peter Martyr](Peter_Martyr "Peter Martyr") (1206-1252).
Educated in the Augustinian cloister at Fiesole, he was transferred
in 1519 to the convent of St John of Verdara near Padua, where he
graduated D.D. about 1527 and made the acquaintance of the future
Cardinal Pole. From that year onwards he was employed as a public
preacher at Brescia, Pisa, Venice and Rome; and in his intervals of
leisure he mastered Greek and Hebrew. In 1530 he was elected abbot
of the Augustinian monastery at Spoleto, and in 1533 prior of the
convent of St Peter ad Aram at Naples.

## Vermigli and the Reformation

About this time, primarily through the influence of Juan de Valdes,
he read [Martin Bucer](Martin_Bucer "Martin Bucer")'s commentaries
on the Gospels and the Psalms and also
[Zwingli](Huldreich_Zwingli "Huldreich Zwingli")'s
*De vera et falsa religione*; and his Biblical studies began to
affect his views. He was accused of erroneous doctrine, and the
Spanish viceroy of Naples prohibited his preaching. The prohibition
was removed on appeal to Rome, but in 1541 Vermigli was transferred
to Lucca, where he again fell under suspicion. Summoned to appear
before a chapter of his order at Genoa, he fled in 1542 to Pisa and
thence to another Italian reformer, Bernardino Ochino, at Florence.
Ochino escaped to Geneva, and Vermigli to Zürich, thence to Basel,
and finally to Strasbourg, where, with Bucer's support, he was
appointed professor of theology and married his first wife,
Catherine Dammartin of Metz.

Vermigli and Ochino were both invited to England by Archbishop
[Thomas Cranmer](Thomas_Cranmer "Thomas Cranmer") in 1547, and
given a pension of forty marks by the government. In 1548 Vermigli
was appointed regius professor of divinity at Oxford, in succession
to the notorious Dr Richard Smith, and was incorporated D.D. In
1549 he took part in a great disputation on the Eucharist. He had
abandoned [Luther](Martin_Luther "Martin Luther")'s doctrine of
[consubstantiation](Consubstantiation "Consubstantiation") and
adopted the doctrine of a Real Presence conditioned by the faith of
the recipient standard amongst [Reformed](Reformed "Reformed")
theologians. Indeed, Vermigli appears to have profoundly affected
the views of Cranmer and Ridley, and historians have proven
definitively that Vermigli had a great deal of influence in the
modifications of the Book of Common Prayer in 1552.

On the accession of the Catholic Mary I of England, Vermigli was
permitted to return to Strasbourg, where, after some opposition
raised on the ground that he had abandoned Lutheran doctrine, he
was reappointed professor of theology. He befriended a number of
English exiles, but had himself in 1556 to accept an offer of the
chair of Hebrew at Zürich owing to his increased alienation from
Lutheranism. He was invited to Geneva in 1557, and to England again
in 1561, but declined both invitations, maintaining, however, a
constant correspondence with Bishop John Jewel and other English
prelates and reformers until his death at Zürich on November 12
1562.

Vermigli published over a score of theological works, chiefly
Biblical commentaries and treatises on the Eucharist. His learning
was striking and profound. Experts today are beginning to realize
that Vermigli played a vital role in both the Swiss and English
Reformations. [John Calvin](John_Calvin "John Calvin") himself
regarded Peter Martyr as one of the greatest expounders of the
doctrine of the Eucharist in
[Protestantism](Protestantism "Protestantism").

*This material is adapted from the 1911 Encyclopedia Britannica which is public domain.*

## Resources

-   Philip McNair, *Peter Martyr in Italy: An Anatomy of Apostasy*,
    (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1967).
-   Frank A. James (editor),
    *Peter Martyr Vermigli And The European Reformations: Semper Reformanda*,
    Brill Academic Publishers (2004).
    [ISBN 9004139141](http://www.theopedia.com/Special:BookSources/9004139141)
-   Frank A. James,
    *Peter Martyr Vermigli and Predestination: The Augustinian Inheritance of an Italian Reformer*,
    Oxford University (1998).



