**Pharisees** were a Jewish sect (or religious-political party)
which arose during the intertestamental period and were active
during Christ's earthly ministry described in the gospels of the
[New Testament](New_Testament "New Testament"). They were noted for
strict observance of rites and ceremonies of the written law and
for insistence on the validity of their own oral traditions
concerning the law. The Pharisees opposed Jesus and His teachings.
They plotted His death (Matt 12:14) and they were denounced by Him
(Matt 23).

Pharisees were distinguished from the
[Sadducees](Sadducees "Sadducees") (the priestly caste) primarily
as scribes and devout laymen. The pharisees developed the synagogue
as a place of worship beyond the temple. Characteristic teachings
of the pharisees included: belief in oral as well as written Law;
resurrection of the human body; belief in the existence of a spirit
world; immortality of the soul; predestination; future rewards and
punishments based upon works.

*This article is a **[stub](http://www.theopedia.com/Category:Theopedia_stubs "Category:Theopedia stubs")**. Please edit it to add information.*
Pharisaism had its beginnings in the Maccabean times (approx. 165
BC) when the threat of persecution was driving many Jews to
relinquish their distinctive manner of life and accept Greek ways.
The First Book of Maccabees tells the story. They were called upon
to eat pork, and renounce the food laws of Leviticus, to give up
their copies of the Law to their persecutors, and let the Temple be
profaned and their children to go uncircumcised. But some stoutly
refused to accede to these demands, preferring at whatever peril to
separate themselves from the rest and declare their complete
devotion to the service of God. (The very word *Pharisee* is a
derivative from a Hebrew word meaning *separatist*) They professed
to be God's people with no other purpose in life than to carry out
His will as revealed in the Law. So arose the Pharisees, as the
Puritans of Judaism.

This would be the nobler side of Pharisaism; however, its weakness
lay in its tendency to direct the Pharisee's attention, not to
spiritual fellowship with God, but to the written Law as the final
expression of His will, so that religion became not a great inward
experience but the meticulous performance of a technique. Further,
since it assumed that the Law was the full expression of the will
of God, it envisaged the possibility that a man might carry it out
so completely that God Himself could ask no more of him. It
resulted in spiritual pride and caused the Pharisees to degenerate
into a sort of religious aristocracy.

Ultimately, Pharasiasm became quite harsh; a religiosity that truly
hated its enemies. It is the kind Jesus encountered in Galilee and
condemned in His Sermon on the Mount. It was the kind that took no
second thought to the stoning of Stephen, Christanity's first
martyr. It certainly left a great disappointment in the soul of
Saul of Tarsus, who, after devoting an entire lifetime to the call
of the Pharisee, still found no fulfillment in the minutiae of
detail of ceremonial cleanness. In the book of Romans, many small
passages reveal the apostle's joy in being released from his former
spiritual bondage when he ultimately placed all his trust in
Christ. (*Paul, A Biography*, Edgar J. Goodspeed, pg. 11-12, 1947,
Abington Press)

## External links

-   [The Pharisees](http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/11789b.htm) at
    New Advent Catholic Encyclopedia
-   [The Pharisees](http://mb-soft.com/believe/txc/pharisee.htm)
    from Elwell Evangelical Dictionary



