The Philippine Independent Church, (officially the Spanish: Iglesia
Filipina Independiente ir the IFI, also known as the Philippine
Independent Catholic Church or the Ilocano: Siwayawaya a Simbaan
nga ti Filipinas (sometimes also know as Tagalog: Malayang Simbahan
ng Pilipinas), is a Christian denomination of the Catholic
tradition in the form of a national church. The church was founded
by the members of the first federation of labor unions in the
country, the Union Obrera Democratica (UOD) in 1902. Isabelo de los
Reyes was the founder of the church and suggested to make Gregorio
Aglipay its head. It is also known as the Aglipayan Church after
its first obispo maximo, Gregorio Aglipay. Unsurprisingly, all the
founding members of the church were excommunicated by the Catholic
Church during its establishment in 1902.[3] Since 1960 it has been
in full communion with the Episcopal Church in the United States of
America (and through it with the entire Anglican Communion) and,
since 1965, with the Old Catholic Union of Utrecht Association of
Churches. Today the Philippine Independent Church or Aglipayan
Church is the second largest Christian denomination in the
Philippines after the Roman Catholic Church. The bulk of the
Aglipayans comes from the northern part of the island of Luzon,
especially in the Ilocandia region, where its first supreme bishop
came from. Now the church is divided into 10 dioceses which
includes the Diocese of United States and Canada. But, due to a
lack of priests, many parishes in the USA are priestless. The
current Obispo Maximo is the Most Reverend Godofredo J. David, who
has his central office in the capital of the country, Manila, at
the (National Cathedral of the Holy Child in Taft Ave, Manila). His
line of episcopal succession goes back from the first Obispo Maximo
Aglipay and which is followed by 10 other successors. The
Philippine Independent Church is considered the most tangible
product of the 1898 Revolution against Spain



