aliases:
- Philip_Melanchthon
---
**Philipp Melanchthon** (1497 - 1560) German author of the
[Augsburg Confession](Augsburg_Confession "Augsburg Confession") of
the Lutheran Church (1530), humanist, theologian, and educator.
Active during the
[Protestant Reformation](Protestant_Reformation "Protestant Reformation"),
he was a friend of [Martin Luther](Martin_Luther "Martin Luther")
and defended his views. In 1521 Melanchthon published the
*Loci Communes*, the first systematic treatment of the new
Wittenberg theology developed by Luther.

## Early life and education

Melanchthon was born at Bretten, near Karlsruhe, where his father,
Georg Schwarzerd, was armorer to Philip, Count Palatine of the
Rhine.

In 1507 he was sent to the Latin school at Pforzheim, the rector of
which, Georg Simler of Wimpfen, introduced him to the study of the
Latin and Greek poets and of the philosophy of Aristotle. But he
was chiefly influenced by his great-uncle, Johann Reuchlin, the
great representative of humanism, who advised him to change his
family name, *Schwarzerd* (literally *Black-earth*), into the Greek
equivalent *Melanchthon.*

Not yet thirteen years old, he entered in 1509 the University of
Heidelberg where he studied philosophy, rhetoric, and
astronomy/astrology, and was known as a good Greek scholar. Being
refused the degree of master in 1512 on account of his youth, he
went to the university of Tübingen, where he pursued humanistic and
philosophical studies, but devoted himself also to the study of
jurisprudence, mathematics, astronomy, and even of medicine.

When, having completed his philosophical course, he had taken the
degree of master in 1516, he began to study
[theology](Theology "Theology"). Under the influence of men like
Johann Reuchlin and [Erasmus](Erasmus "Erasmus") he became
convinced that true [Christianity](Christianity "Christianity") was
something quite different from scholastic theology as it was taught
at the university. But at that time he had not yet formed fixed
opinions on theology, since later he often called
[Luther](Martin_Luther "Martin Luther") his spiritual father. He
became *conventor (repetent)* in the *contubernium* and had to
instruct younger scholars. He also lectured on oratory, on Virgil
and Livy.

His first publications were an edition of Terence (1516) and his
Greek grammar (1518), but he had written previously the preface to
the *Epistolae* *clarorum virorum* of Reuchlin (1514).

## Professor at Wittenberg

The more strongly he felt the opposition of the scholastic party to
the reforms instituted by him at the University of Tübingen, the
more willingly he followed a call to Wittenberg as professor of
Greek, where he aroused great admiration by his inaugural
*De corrigendis adolescentiae studiis*. He lectured before five to
six hundred students, afterward to fifteen hundred. He was highly
esteemed by Luther, whose influence brought him to the study of
[Scripture](Bible "Bible"), especially of
[Paul](index.php?title=Paul_of_Tarsus&action=edit&redlink=1 "Paul of Tarsus (page does not exist)"),
and so to a more living knowledge of the Evangelical doctrine of
[salvation](Salvation "Salvation").

He was present at the disputation of Leipzig (1519) as a spectator,
but influenced the discussion by his comments and suggestions, so
that he gave
[Johann Eck](index.php?title=Johann_Eck&action=edit&redlink=1 "Johann Eck (page does not exist)")
an excuse for an attack. In his *Defensio contra Johannem Eckium*
(Wittenberg, 1519) he had already clearly developed the principles
of the authority of Scripture and its interpretation.

On account of the interest in theology shown in his lectures on
[Gospel of Matthew](Gospel_of_Matthew "Gospel of Matthew") and
[Epistle to the Romans](Epistle_to_the_Romans "Epistle to the Romans"),
together with his investigations into the doctrines of Paul, he was
granted the degree of bachelor of theology, and was transferred to
the theological faculty. Soon he was bound closer than ever to
Wittenberg by his marriage to Katharina Krapp, the mayor's
daughter, a marriage contracted at his friends' urgent request, and
especially Luther's (November 25, 1520).

## Augsburg Confession

Although based on the Marburg and Schwabach articles of Luther, the
[Augsburg Confession](Augsburg_Confession "Augsburg Confession"),
which was laid before the Diet of Augsburg in 1530, was mainly the
work of Melanchthon. It is true, Luther did not conceal the fact
that the irenical attitude of the confession was not what he had
wished, but neither he nor Melanchthon was conscious of any
difference in doctrine, and so the most important
[Protestant](Protestant "Protestant") symbol is a monument of the
harmony of the two Reformers on Gospel teachings. Some would say
that at the diet Melanchthon did not show that dignified and firm
attitude which faith in the truth and the justice of his cause
could have inspired in him, perhaps because he had not sought the
part of a political leader, as he may have lacked the necessary
knowledge of human nature, as well as energy and decision. The
*Apology of the Augsburg Confession*, likewise the work of
Melanchthon, was also a clear exposition of the disputed doctrines,
drawn immediately from experience and Scripture.

Now in comparative quiet Melanchthon could devote himself to his
academical and literary labors. The most important theological work
of this period was the *Commentarii in Epistolam Pauli ad Romanos*
(Wittenberg, 1532), a noteworthy book, as it for the first time
established the doctrine that "to be justified" means "to be
accounted just," while the Apology still placed side by side the
two meanings of "to be made just" and "to be accounted just."
Melanchthon's increasing fame gave occasion for several honorable
calls to Tübingen (Sept., 1534), to France, and to England, but
consideration of the elector induced him to refuse them.

## Discussions on [Lord's Supper](Communion "Communion") and [Justification](Justification "Justification")

He took an important part in the discussions concerning the Lord's
Supper which began in 1531. He approved fully of the Formula of
Concord sent by [Martin Bucer](Martin_Bucer "Martin Bucer") to
Wittenberg, and at the instigation of the Landgrave of Hesse
discussed the question with Bucer in Cassel, at the end of 1534. He
eagerly labored for an agreement, for his patristic studies and the
Dialogue (1530) of Johannes Oecolampadius had made him doubt the
correctness of Luther's doctrine. Moreover, after the death of
Zwingli and the change of the political situation his earlier
scruples in regard to a union lost their weight. Bucer did not go
so far as to believe with Luther that the true body of Christ in
the Lord's Supper is bitten by the teeth, but admitted the offering
of the body and blood in the symbols of bread and wine. Melanchthon
discussed Bucer's views with the most prominent adherents of
Luther; but Luther himself would not agree to a mere veiling of the
dispute. Melanchthon's relation to Luther was not disturbed by his
work as a mediator, although Luther for a time suspected that
Melanchthon was "almost of the opinion of Zwingli"; nevertheless he
desired to "share his heart with him."

During his sojourn in Tubingen in 1536 Melanchthon was severely
attacked by Cordatus, preacher in Niemeck, because he had taught
that works are necessary for salvation. In the second edition of
his Loci (1535) he abandoned his earlier strict doctrine of
determinism which went even beyond that of
[Augustine](Augustine_of_Hippo "Augustine of Hippo"), and in its
place taught more clearly his so-called
[Synergism](Synergism "Synergism"). He repulsed the attack of
Cordatus in a letter to Luther and his other colleagues by stating
that he had never departed from their common teachings on this
subject, and in the [antinomian](Antinomianism "Antinomianism")
controversy of 1537 Melanchthon was in harmony with Luther.

*This material is adapted from the [The New Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge](http://www.ccel.org/s/schaff/encyc/encyc07/htm/ii.x.iv.htm) at ccel.org.*

## External links

-   [Philip Melancthon: Scholar and Reformer](http://www.wrs.edu/Materials%20for%20Web%20Site/Journals/3-2%20Aug-1996/Frank%20-%20Philip%20Melancthon.pdf)
    (PDF), by Mr. Eric Frank



