**Polycarp** is a celebrated figure in the
[history of Christianity](Church_history "Church history"). A
direct pupil of the apostle [John](John "John"), Polycarp lived
between 70 and 155 A.D., connecting him to both the biblical
apostles and the age of the early church fathers. Several ancient
sources document the contributions of Polycarp to Christianity,
including his letters written to the church at Philippi, in which
he encourages the members to remain strong in their faith and to
flee from materialism. He also instructs the members in the proper
handling of financial dishonesty that was creeping into the church.
Polycarp served as the bishop of the church at Smyrna (modern day
Izmir in Turkey), and was recognized as one of the early combatants
of Christian heresies. He rejected the teachings of Marcion, an
influential heretic who tried to create a "new brand" of
Christianity by redefining God and rejecting Old Testament
teachings. In his well-known thesis, Polycarp combats Gnostic
heresies that were beginning to spread throughout the Christian
church. [[1]](http://www.polycarp.net/)

## A martyr for truth

Polycarp's greatest contribution to Christianity may be his
martyred death. His martyrdom stands as one of the most well
documented events of antiquity. The emperors of Rome had unleashed
bitter attacks against the Christians during this period, and
members of the early church recorded many of the persecutions and
deaths. Polycarp was arrested on the charge of being a Christian --
a member of a politically dangerous cult whose rapid growth needed
to be stopped. Amidst an angry mob, the Roman proconsul took pity
on such a gentle old man and urged Polycarp to proclaim, "Caesar is
Lord". If only Polycarp would make this declaration and offer a
small pinch of incense to Caesar's statue he would escape torture
and death. To this Polycarp responded, "Eighty-six years I have
served Christ, and He never did me any wrong. How can I blaspheme
my King who saved me?" Steadfast in his stand for Christ, Polycarp
refused to compromise his beliefs, and thus, was burned alive at
the stake. [[2]](http://www.polycarp.net/)

## An interesting story

Polycarp, bishop of the church of in Smyrna, at one time made a
visit to Rome. Marcion and Polycarp had known each other very well
back East. When Polycarp happened to come across Marcion on the
street, he was going to pass without speaking. Marcion stopped him
and said, "Don't you know me anymore, Polycarp?" "Yes," answered
Polycarp, "I know who you are. You are the first-born of Satan."
^[***[citation\ needed](http://www.theopedia.com/Theopedia:Writing_guide#Reference_your_work\ "Theopedia:Writing\ guide")***]^

## A testimony for our lives

Polycarp's martyrdom is [a] historical reality. He died for one
reason—his unyielding faith in the Lord, Jesus Christ. Yet
Polycarp's well-recorded death is only one of many lives that were
given to reveal and proclaim the truth of Jesus Christ. In light of
the cruel and torturous deaths of the first and second generation
Christians, all theories that Christianity is a fabricated myth,
created for the personal gain of its followers, must be rejected.
Even today, many will die for a belief, but none will die for a
lie. God allows the deaths of His saints not because He is a
helpless or indifferent Lord, but because their deaths are powerful
declarations of the free gift of life that is offered to us through
the Person of Jesus Christ. If you have any doubts about the truth
of Christ as revealed in the Bible, reexamine the biblical text in
light of the willful deaths of nearly all of its writers, men who
were eyewitnesses to Christ's life and ministry. Polycarp, like
many other Christians to this day, was only able to die for Christ
because he lived for Christ. His life was radically transformed by
the work of the Holy Spirit—the desires, worries, pains and fears
of this world no longer bound him. Polycarp's life and death
provides an inspirational example for all Christians. He gave his
earthly life for Christ, and in the midst of his sacrifice, he
gained eternal life. [[3]](http://www.polycarp.net/)

## Surviving Writing and Early Accounts

His sole surviving work is his *Letter to the Philippians*, a
mosaic of references to the New Testament. It, and an account of
*The Martyrdom of Polycarp* that takes the form of a circular
letter from the church of Smyrna to the churches of Pontus, form
part of the collection of writings Roman Catholics term "The
[Apostolic Fathers](Apostolic_Fathers "Apostolic Fathers")" to
emphasize their particular closeness to the apostles in Church
traditions.

[Irenaeus](Irenaeus "Irenaeus") relates how and when he became a
Christian and in his letter to Florinus stated that he saw and
heard him personally in lower Asia; in particular he heard the
account of Polycarp's intercourse with
[John the Apostle](John "John") and with others who had seen
[Jesus](Jesus "Jesus"). Irenaeus also reports that Polycarp was
converted to Christianity by apostles, was consecrated a bishop,
and communicated with many who had seen Jesus. He repeatedly
emphasizes the very old age of Polycarp. The *Martyrdom* has
Polycarp himself giving his age on the day of his death as 86
years.

## Span of Life

The date of Polycarp's death is disputed.
[Eusebius](Eusebius "Eusebius") dates it to the reign of Marcus
Aurelius, *circa* 166-167. However, a post-Eusebian addition to the
*Martyrdom of Polycarp* dates his death to Saturday, February 23 in
the proconsulship of Statius Quadratus—which works out to be 155 or
156. These earlier dates better fit the tradition of his
association with Ignatius and John the Evangelist.

## External links

-   [Polycarp.net](http://www.polycarp.net/)
-   [Polycarp to the Philippians](http://www.earlychristianwritings.com/polycarp.html)



