**Pontius Pilate** was the fifth Roman governor of Judea and the
man who ordered the crucifixion of Jesus. According to the New
Testament, he didn't really want to execute Jesus, but was
pressured into ordering his death by the Jewish religious
authorities and a mob of unruly spectators.

Pilate became the governor (or Prefect) of Judea in 26 AD and held
the position for about ten years. Some sources say that he had
previously been an officer in the Roman army and that his wife was
a niece of Emperor Tiberius.

The historian Josephus describes him as an inflexible and brutal
man who was quick to resort to force, and on at least two occasions
ordered his soldiers to attack unarmed demonstrators. But he may
have sometimes felt a need to act quickly, because Judea was a
difficult province to govern, and a peaceful demonstration could
easily turn into a riot or uprising.

He was probably in the third or fourth year of his rule when Jesus
was brought to him. The main charge against Jesus was that he
claimed to be a king, which was equivalent to rebelling against the
emperor. The Jewish religious leaders wanted Pilate to order a
crucifixion, since that was the standard punishment for sedition.
But apparently Pilate was touched by Jesus and realized that he was
innocent. So instead of immediately giving the order for the
crucifixion, he tried to find a way to save him.

But the Jewish leaders, along with a mob in the courtyard, kept up
the pressure. And Pilate was finally forced to yield when the
Jewish leaders threatened to report him to the emperor for failing
to enforce the laws against sedition. Still, although he did
finally give the order for the crucifixion, he washed his hands as
a symbolic gesture that he was being forced to act against his
will.

In 36 AD, after reports of cruelty and oppression, Pilate was
called back to Rome. A legend relates that both he and his wife
eventually converted to Christianity.



## References

-   [Pontius Pilate](http://www.gospel-mysteries.net/pontius-pilate.html)

-   [Catholic Encyclopedia Pontius Pilate Entry](http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/12083c.htm)



