**Presentism** is simply a view in the
[philosophy of time](index.php?title=Philosophy_of_time&action=edit&redlink=1 "Philosophy of time (page does not exist)")
-- the view that only the present exists.

Presentism has been encountered of late in discussions of
[Open Theism](Open_Theism "Open Theism"), where it is said that
"God's knows all things that are knowable, but not things that are
impossible to know. It is impossible to know the future choices of
being with free-will (which God has freely chosen to create),
therefore His knowledge includes all past events and that of the
present, but none in the future save what He plans to do."
[[1]](http://basictheology.com/definitions/Presentism/)

While many open theists hold to presentism as defined above, many
presentists do not deny God the exhaustive foreknowledge that this
quote denies. Many philosophical presentists believe there to be
truths about the nonexistent future. All presentists believe there
to be truths about the nonexistent past, so it makes little sense
to say that there are no truths about the future merely on the
grounds that it doesn't exist.

As a matter of sociological fact, very few philosophers who deal
with the metaphysics of time consider *presentism* a viable view
given what we know about spacetime in physics, though a few of its
defenders are trying to salvage it in the face of such objections.
It's helpful to think of presentism in contrast with some other
views about time.
[Eternalism](index.php?title=Eternalism&action=edit&redlink=1 "Eternalism (page does not exist)")
is the most popular contender, and the primary debate is between
those two theories. A few philosophers have defended other views in
addition.

Presentism and eternalism differ about the existence of times. Both
views agree that the present exists. Eternalists also believe that
all past and future times exist. The whole timeline exists, and
everything at every moment has just as much existence as what's
existing now. Presentists believe that only things that exist now
exist at all. There's no possibility, according to presentism, of
something's existing in the past or existing in the future. They
will say that something did exist in the past or will exist in the
future, but nothing in the past exists in the past. It exists now,
or it simply fails to exist.

### Alternatives

One alternative sees time as a growing block. Once a moment in time
exists, it remains in the realm of being. New moments come into
being, and time grows as new moments add on to the end of the
timeline. The primary motivation for a growing block view is to
capture the sense that the future and the past are not analogous.
In fact, one motivation people give for presentism is actually not
really a motivation for presentism but (if the argument is any
good, and that's controversial) a motivation for a growing block
view. That motivation has to do with future contingents (see
[Open theism](Open_theism "Open theism") for more on future
contingents). If statements about the future are either necessary
and true or simply neither true nor false, then no contingent truth
(a truth that didn't have to be true) can exist with regard to the
future. If the past is not like this, and a metaphysical view of
time is supposed to ground this fact, then the growing block view
could do that. Presentism could not. The downside of the growing
block view is that the past and present have all the features of
eternalism involving multiple times existing. Presentists think
this view is as bad as eternalism in that way. It also denies the
existence of the future, which eternalists will resist on the same
grounds that they deny presentism. One might consider it the worst
of both worlds, therefore, unless this idea of the past and future
not being analogous is so important as to trump all other
concerns.

Another alternative might be called a moving spotlight view. The
whole of time exists, but there's some special ontological status
for the present. If this involves degrees of being, with the
present being more real but all of it existing, it denies standard
philosophical views about existence. It becomes very difficult to
do formal logic if 'exists' doesn't simply mean that something
exists, an all-or-nothing matter. If it doesn't involve degrees of
being, and the present is only special in some non-ontological
manner, then all of time exists, and eternalism is correct. If it
doesn't involve degrees of being but is about ontology, then it
seems there's something ontologically special about the present,
i.e. it exists, but that means the past and future don't, and you
have presentism. So the moving spotlight view has problems even in
terms of how to express the view in a way that doesn't just reduce
to another view.

### The Appeal

Most arguments for presentism appeal to common sense. Most
arguments against it appeal to science or to semantical
considerations about how to speak about the past and future if the
things you're talking about no longer exist or don't yet exist. If
there's nothing in reality to refer to, then what are you talking
about? Presentists have to paraphrase such statements or otherwise
explain what makes such statements true, and that task has proved
formidable. This problem also arises for the growing block view.

## See also

-   [Open theism](Open_theism "Open theism")
-   [Foreknowledge of God](Foreknowledge_of_God "Foreknowledge of God")

## External links

-   [Richard Chappell, "Now and Forever"](http://pixnaps.blogspot.com/2005/05/presentism-and-relativity.html)
    (argues that presentism is inconsistent with relativity in physics)
-   [Ned Markosian, "Time"](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/time/)
    in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (general introduction to
    this and other issues in the philosophy of time; Markosian is a
    presentist)
-   [Ted Sider, "Presentism and Ontological Commitment"](http://fas-philosophy.rutgers.edu/sider/papers/presentism.pdf)
    (Sider is not a presentist, but he here defends presentism from the
    charge that presentism cannot consistently speak of the past and
    future by appealing to a notion he calls quasi-truth)



