**Priscilla and Aquila** were a first century Christian missionary
couple described in the New Testament. They became the honored and
much-loved friends and ministry partners with the Apostle Paul. He
was generous in his recognition and acknowledgment of his
indebtedness for them. They have been called the most famous couple
in the Bible since they are mentioned seven times and are always
named as a couple. Of those seven times, five times Priscilla's
name is mentioned first. They were tentmakers by trade.

*Priscilla* was a woman of Jewish heritage and one of the earliest
known Christian converts who lived in Rome. Her name is a Roman
diminutive, or nickname, for Prisca. Some scholars have advanced a
case for Priscilla being the author of the New Testament Book of
Hebrews.^[[1]](#note-0)^^[[2]](#note-1)^ She was married to
*Aquila* (Greek Ἀκύλας *Akúlas*), originally from Pontus, who also
was a Jew who believed that Jesus of Nazareth was the Messiah
promised by God to the Jews. Aquila had the family name of the
commander of a legion and means "eagle."

## Travels and ministries

Priscilla and Aquila fled Rome during the Jewish persecution under
Claudius, 49 or 50, and settled in Corinth. There they hosted Paul,
also a tentmaker by trade, on his first visit to the town (Acts
18:1 ff). They accompanied Paul to Ephesus (Acts 18:18-19) where
they instructed the eloquent and brilliant Alexandrian preacher,
Apollos. He knew and preached boldly to the crowds only the baptism
of John and nothing of salvation through Christ. "When Priscilla
and Aquila heard him, they invited him to their home and explained
to him the way of God more adequately" (Acts
18:26).^[[3]](#note-2)^

The Apostle Paul lived with them there for three years during his
third missionary journey. A Christian church met in their house (1
Corinthians 16:19). They left Ephesus and returned to Rome (Acts
19:24-40) where another church met in their house (Romans 16:3-5).
Probably because of the persecution of Nero, they soon left Rome
and settled again at Ephesus (2 Timothy 4:19).^[[4]](#note-3)^

## Pauline affirmations

The Apostle Paul, in his Epistle to the Romans, recollects about
his faithful disciples: "Greet Priscilla and Aquila, my co-workers
in Christ Jesus, who for my life risked their own necks, to whom
not only do I give thanks, but also all the churches of the
Gentiles." (Romans 16:3-4, NASB).

In 2 Timothy 4:19 (NASB), Paul asks Timothy to "Greet Prisca and
Aquila...."

## The seven biblical references to Priscilla and Aquila

1.  Acts 18:2-3. There he (Paul) met a Jew named Aquila, a native
    of Pontus, who had recently come from Italy with his wife
    Priscilla, because Claudius had ordered all the Jews to leave Rome.
    Paul went to see them, and because he was a tentmaker as they were,
    he stayed and worked with them.
2.  Acts 18:18. Paul stayed on in Corinth for some time. Then he
    left the brothers and sailed for Syria, accompanied by Priscilla
    and Aquila.
3.  Acts 18:19. They arrived at Ephesus, where Paul left Priscilla
    and Aquila.
4.  Acts 18:26. He (Apollos) began to speak boldly in the
    synagogue. When Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they invited him to
    their home and explained to him the way of God more adequately.
5.  Romans 16:3-4. Greet Priscilla and Aquila, my fellow workers in
    Christ Jesus. They risked their lives for me. Not only I but all
    the churches of the Gentiles are grateful to them.
6.  1 Corinthians 16:19. The churches in the province of Asia send
    you greetings. Aquila and Priscilla greet you warmly in the Lord,
    and so does the church that meets at their house.
7.  2 Timothy 4:19. Greet Priscilla and Aquila and the household of
    Onesiphorus.

## Endnotes

1.  [↑](#ref-0) von Harnack, Adolph, “Probabilia uber die Addresse
    und den Verfasser des Habraerbriefes,” Zeitschrift fur die
    Neutestamentliche Wissenschaft und die Kunde der aelteren Kirche
    (E. Preuschen, Berlin: Forschungen und Fortschritte, 1900),
    1:16–41. English translation available in Lee Anna Starr,
    *The Bible Status of Woman.* Zarephath, N.J.: Pillar of Fire,
    1955), 392–415
2.  [↑](#ref-1) Hoppin, Ruth.
    *Priscilla's Letter: Finding the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews.*
    Lost Coast Press, 2000.
    [ISBN 1882897501](http://www.theopedia.com/Special:BookSources/1882897501)
3.  [↑](#ref-2) Herbert Lockyer. *All the Women of the Bible.*
    Zondervan, 1988.
    [ISBN 978-0310281511](http://www.theopedia.com/Special:BookSources/9780310281511)
4.  [↑](#ref-3) Maas, Anthony. "Aquila and Priscilla." The Catholic
    Encyclopedia. Vol. 1. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1907. 6
    Nov. 2009

## External links

-   [Did Priscilla “Teach” Apollos? - An Examination of the Meaning of ektithimi in Acts 18:26](http://www.bible.org/page.asp?page_id=1476),
    by Daniel B. Wallace



