**Westminster Theological Seminary** is a
[Presbyterian](Presbyterian "Presbyterian") and
[Reformed](Reformed "Reformed") Christian graduate educational
institution founded in Philadelphia in 1929 under the leadership of
[J. Gresham Machen](J._Gresham_Machen "J. Gresham Machen").

*This article is a **[stub](http://www.theopedia.com/Category:Theopedia_stubs "Category:Theopedia stubs")**. Please edit it to add information.*
## Background

The founders of Westminster Seminary were all former faculty at
Princeton Seminary and departed Princeton over what they saw as
modernist influences.

"Princeton [had] excelled under the leadership of distinguished
teachers who devoted themselves vigorously and effectively to the
development, propagation, and maintenance of the Reformed faith.
Among those best known as teachers of the great scriptural system
of theology set forth by Princeton's first professor
[Archibald Alexander](Archibald_Alexander "Archibald Alexander")
were [Charles Hodge](Charles_Hodge "Charles Hodge"), J. A.
Alexander, [B. B. Warfield](B._B._Warfield "B. B. Warfield"), and
[J. Gresham Machen](J._Gresham_Machen "J. Gresham Machen"). But
eventually a movement surfaced to end Princeton's adherence to
scriptural theology, and in 1929 Princeton Theological Seminary was
reorganized under modernist influences.

"Among the Princeton faculty who loved the Reformed faith were
Robert Dick Wilson, J. Gresham Machen, Oswald T. Allis, and
[Cornelius Van Til](Cornelius_Van_Til "Cornelius Van Til"). Almost
immediately after Princeton's reorganization, these four men
founded Westminster Theological Seminary in Philadelphia, and, with
others who were invited to join the teaching staff, continued the
exposition and defense of the Reformed faith."
[[1]](http://www.wts.edu/about/history.html)

## External links

-   [Official website of Westminster Theological Seminary](http://www.wts.edu/)



