**Multimedia**

-   [A Brief History of Trinitarian Thought](http://www.reformedforum.org/podpress_trac/web/404/0/ctc042.mp3)
    (MP3), with [Carl Trueman](Carl_Trueman "Carl Trueman"), Nick
    Batzig, Jeff Waddington, Camden Bucey

## Before the Nicene Creed

Since [Christianity](Christianity "Christianity") is a religion
derived from [Judaism](Judaism "Judaism"), it should not be a
surprise that from the beginning it has been adamantly
[monotheistic](Monotheism "Monotheism"). The early 2nd century
Apologists like [Justin Martyr](Justin_Martyr "Justin Martyr")
rejected [Marcionite](Marcionism "Marcionism") and
[Gnostic](Gnosticism "Gnosticism") dualism wholeheartedly and
asserted the oneness of [God](God "God") in strong, almost
Platonistic language.

The difficulty present in early Christianity was integrating this
strongly monotheistic tradition with the new revelation available
in [Jesus Christ](Jesus_Christ "Jesus Christ"). Essentially, this
new revelation was that God had made Himself known through and in
the person of Jesus of Nazareth, the hoped-for Messiah of Israel.
This God-Man was clearly described as being divine, yet was
presented as a distinct person from
[God the Father](God_the_Father "God the Father"). Christ himself
revealed the coming [Spirit of God](Holy_Spirit "Holy Spirit") who
also possessed
[divine attributes](Attributes_of_God "Attributes of God") and too
was spoken of as distinct from the Father. These statements of
Jesus, along with the teaching of the epistles of
[Paul](Paul "Paul") and [John](John "John"), presented a unique
theological challenge to the early Christians.

By the close of the [New Testament](New_Testament "New Testament")
era, there were clear statements of
[Christ's pre-existence](Pre-existence_of_Jesus "Pre-existence of Jesus")
and His role in the [creation of the world](Creation "Creation")
(cf. John 1). From the words of the NT Scriptures alone there were
nascent suggestions of Trinitarianism in various liturgical
formulations of the early church; for instance, baptisms in the
[Church](Church "Church") were always done in the name of the
Father, the Son and the [Holy Spirit](Holy_Spirit "Holy Spirit").

Speaking of [Trinitarianism](Trinitarianism "Trinitarianism") in
the ante-Nicene period is somewhat anachronistic, since the word
Trinity (Lat. *trinitas*) was first coined by the Latin father
[Tertullian](Tertullian "Tertullian") in the 2nd century, and the
Trinitarian doctrine was not solidified as dogma until the early
4th century. A
[systematic presentation](Systematic_theology "Systematic theology")
of the development of Trinitarian theology is best seen in a
roughly chronological fashion, from the the Canon of Scripture,
through the
[early church fathers](Early_church_fathers "Early church fathers"),
and the world-defying [Athanasius](Athanasius "Athanasius").
However, [Roger Olson](Roger_Olson "Roger Olson") reminds us that
"Christian belief in God as triune did not arise in the fourth
century with Roman emporer Constantine and the Christian bishops
that he dominated. Belief that it arose then as part of a vague
paganizing or Hellenizing of Christianity is a caricature often
promoted by anti-trinitarian cults and sects" (Roger Olson,
*The Mosaic of Christian Belief*, p. 135)

## The apostolic fathers

The [Apostolic Fathers](Apostolic_Fathers "Apostolic Fathers")
should be seen more as bearers of the faith than as theologians
wrestling with issues of
[hypostasis](index.php?title=Hypostasis&action=edit&redlink=1 "Hypostasis (page does not exist)")
and [homoousios](Homoousios "Homoousios"). There is no explicit
formulation of Trinitarian theology extant in their writings; what
is immediately apparent, however, is the use of what patristic
scholars call "dyadic" and "triadic" formulae. In addition to this,
we have various apostolic Fathers confessing that Jesus Christ is
not the Son of God in merely human terms, but in divine terms as
well.

A good example of the so-called triadic formulae occurs in the
Church father [Ignatius](Ignatius "Ignatius") (30-107 AD), who
exhorts the Magnesians to "study, therefore, to be established in
the doctrines of the Lord and the apostles, that so all things,
whatsoever ye do, may prosper both in the flesh and spirit; in
faith and love; in the Son, and in the Father, and in the Spirit;
in the beginning and in the end; with your most admirable bishop,
and the well-compacted spiritual crown of your presbytery, and the
deacons who are according to God. Be ye subject to the bishop, and
to one another, as Jesus Christ to the Father, according to the
flesh, and the apostles to Christ, and to the Father, and to the
Spirit; that so there may be a union both fleshly and spiritual"
(*Epistle to the Magnesians*, 13:1, 2 emphasis added).

[Ignatius](Ignatius "Ignatius") also goes on his letter to the
Ephesians to explicitly confess that "our God, Jesus Christ, was,
according to the appointment of God, conceived in the womb by Mary,
of the seed of David, but by the Holy Ghost. He was born and
baptized, that by His passion He might purify the water."
(*Epistle to the Ephesians*, 18:2)

In this passage of Ignatius one will note two things: first, that
this church Father wholeheartedly affirms the deity of Jesus of
Nazereth while at the same time alluding to a sort of economy
between God and Jesus Christ, which is essentially what the later
doctrine of the Trinity sought to express in the most explicit
terms.

## Terminology

The use of **trinitarian terms** has received considerable attack
throughout the years of
[church history](Church_history "Church history"). Such terms are:
[homoousios](Homoousios "Homoousios"), [person](Person "Person"),
[essence](Essence "Essence"), and [nature](Nature "Nature") among
others. While it is true that these terms were borrowed from Greek
philosophy, critics generally go a step further and assert one of
three (or even all) points: (1) Greek philosophy, with its terms,
infiltrated Christian theology and therefore corrupted the
[orthodox](Orthodox "Orthodox") [doctrine](Doctrine "Doctrine") of
[God](God "God"), (2) the use of non-biblical terms violates
[sola scriptura](Sola_scriptura "Sola scriptura"), or (3) the use
of non-biblical terms results in non-biblical (i.e. false)
theology. Therefore, it becomes important to understand these
trinitarian terms, where they came from, how they are defined, and
if we are justified in using them.

### The use of non-biblical language

Christians should be cautious while using language not found in
Scripture to define God, however, they should not refrain from
doing so. [John Frame](John_Frame "John Frame"), in his
*Doctrine of God* (2002), shows that "as it struggled to define the
doctrine of the Trinity precisely, the church came to adopt
specialized terminology for God's oneness and threeness... in
general, these terms have served the church well. But they have
also raised additional questions and caused some
misunderstandings," (p. 696). Frame openly admits that these terms
have not solved the problems or answered every question. However,
these terms did help the church solidify what it believed against
the ever present heresies.

B.B. Warfield, former president of Princeton Theological Seminary,
clearly explains how these terms have remained faithful to
Scriptural teachings about God,

"the definition of a Biblical doctrine in such un-Biblical language
can be justified only on the principle that it is better to
preserve the truth of Scripture than the words of Scripture. The
doctrine of the Trinity lies in Scripture in solution; when it is
crystallized from its solvent it does not cease to be Scriptural,
but only comes into clearer view. Or, to speak without figure, the
doctrine of the Trinity is given to us in Scripture, not in
formulated definition, but in fragmentary allusions... we are not
passing from Scripture, but entering more thoroughly into the
meaning of Scripture. We may state the doctrine in technical terms,
supplied by philosophical reflection; but the doctrine stated is a
genuinely Scriptural doctrine."
[[1]](http://www.studylight.org/enc/isb/view.cgi?number=T8915) In
other words, Warfield states that Christians must be faithful to
what is in Scripture when we are using non-biblical language.
[Augustine](Augustine "Augustine") made note of this issue, saying
"The answer 'three persons' is given, not that something should be
said, but so as not to remain wholly silent," (*On the Trinity*,
5.9.10). We should not be afraid of looking at the whole of
Scripture in order to understand who God is. Theologians over time
have used terms that better describe the being of God and the
persons relationship(s) to one another.

### Various terms used in trinitarian language

*See main pages: [Essence](Essence "Essence"), [Nature](Nature "Nature"), [Being](Being "Being"), [Person](Person "Person"), [Substance](Substance "Substance"), [Homoousios](Homoousios "Homoousios"), [Homoiousios](Homoiousios "Homoiousios"), [Heteroousios](Heteroousios "Heteroousios"), [Perichoresis](Perichoresis "Perichoresis")*
## See also

-   [Trinity](Trinity "Trinity")
-   [First Council of Nicaea](First_Council_of_Nicaea "First Council of Nicaea")
-   [Trinitarian theology](Trinitarian_theology "Trinitarian theology")

## External links

-   [The Doctrine of the Trinity in the Early Church](http://basictheology.com/articles/Trinity_Development/)
    (basictheology.com)
-   [Tracking the Trinity in Contemporary Theology](http://www.ctsfw.net/media/pdfs/plesstrackingtrinity.pdf)
    (PDF), by John T. Pless (from the 27th Annual Symposium on the
    Lutheran Confessions)
-   "Trinity" (*ISBE*)
    [Part 1](http://www.studylight.org/enc/isb/view.cgi?number=T8915),
    [Part 2](http://www.studylight.org/enc/isb/view.cgi?number=T8916),
    by [B. B. Warfield](B._B._Warfield "B. B. Warfield")
-   [Mormon Theism, the Traditional Christian Concept of God, and Greek Philosophy: A Critical Analysis](http://web.archive.org/web/20060913001551/http://www.etsjets.org/jets/journal/44/44-4/44-4-PP671-95_JETS.pdf)
    (pdf), by [Francis Beckwith](Francis_Beckwith "Francis Beckwith").
    This article defends Christianity against [Mormon](Mormon "Mormon")
    objections to using non-biblical language to describe who God is.
    [HTML version](http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_qa3817/is_200112/ai_n9010827/?tag=content;col1)



