**Donatism** was an early [heresy](Heresy "Heresy"). Named for its
leader, the theologian *Donatus the Great* (d. 355), Donatism
included a group of extremist sects, mostly in North Africa, that
emphasized
[Asceticism](index.php?title=Asceticism&action=edit&redlink=1 "Asceticism (page does not exist)").
They valued martyrdom and found lapses of faith (even under torture
or threat of death) inexcusable. The heresy involved their
contention that the sacraments required a priest of pure moral
character to be effective and only the pure (who had not lapsed
under persecution) should be allowed in the church. They were
opposed by
[Augustine of Hippo](Augustine_of_Hippo "Augustine of Hippo").

## Multimedia

-   [Donatism](http://covenantseminary.inmotionhosting.com/CH310_Lecture_11.mp3)
    (MP3), by David Calhoun

## Background

"The schism arose when certain Christians protested the election of
the bishop of Carthage, charging that his consecration by Felix,
bishop of Aptunga, was invalid because Felix was considered a
traditor (i.e., one who turns over sacred books and relics to the
civil authorities during a persecution). Condemnation was extended
to all in communion with Felix. Behind their objection lay the
heresy, familiar to [Montanism](Montanism "Montanism") and
Novatian, that only those living a blameless life belonged in the
church, and, further, that the validity of any sacrament depended
upon the personal worthiness of the priest administering it. The
Donatist practice of rebaptizing was particularly abhorrent to the
orthodox. Condemned by the Synod of Arles (314) and also by the
Roman emperor, Constantine I, the Donatists seceded (316) and set
up their own hierarchy. By 350 they outnumbered the orthodox
Christians in Africa, and each city had its opposing orthodox and
Donatist bishops. It was the teaching of
[St. Augustine](Augustine "Augustine"), as presented in his
writings and at the debate between orthodox and Donatist bishops at
Carthage (411), that turned the tide against Donatism. Strong state
suppression and ascetic excesses among some of their own members
further reduced their number. The remnants of the schismatic
movement had vanished along with African Christianity before the
advent of the Islamic invaders." (Excerpt from
*The Columbia Encyclopedia*, Sixth Edition).

## External links

-   [Donatists](http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/05121a.htm) from
    New Advent Catholic Encyclopedia
-   [Donatus & the Donatist Schism](http://www.earlychurch.org.uk/donatism.php)
    from Earlychurch.org.uk



