In a general sense, idolatry is the paying of divine honor to any
created thing or the ascription of divine power to natural
agencies.^[[1]](#note-0)^

There are two main Bible passages that speak to idolatry, one from
the Old Testament, and one from the New Testament. Although there
are other relevant passages, Exodus lays down the foundation for
all other discussions of idolatry, and Romans lays down the New
Testament "expansion."

Exodus 20:2-6 “I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of
Egypt, out of the land of slavery. You shall have no other gods
before ﻿me. You shall not make for yourself an idol in the form of
anything in heaven above or on the earth beneath or in the waters
below. You shall not bow down to them or worship them; for I, the
LORD your God, am a jealous God, punishing the children for the sin
of the fathers to the third and fourth generation of those who hate
me, but showing love to a thousand generations of those who love me
and keep my commandments. ^[[2]](#note-1)^

Romans 1:18-25 ﻿"The wrath of God is being revealed from heaven
against all the godlessness and wickedness of men who suppress the
truth by their wickedness, since what may be known about God is
plain to them, because God has made it plain to them. For since the
creation of the world God’s invisible qualities—his eternal power
and divine nature—have been clearly seen, being understood from
what has been made, so that men are without excuse. For although
they knew God, they neither glorified him as God nor gave thanks to
him, but their thinking became futile and their foolish hearts were
darkened. Although they claimed to be wise, they became fools and
exchanged the glory of the immortal God for images made to look
like mortal man and birds and animals and reptiles. Therefore God
gave them over in the sinful desires of their hearts to sexual
impurity for the degrading of their bodies with one another. They
exchanged the truth of God for a lie, and worshiped and served
created things rather than the Creator—who is forever praised.
Amen. ^[[3]](#note-2)^

However, idolatry has never been merely limited to external, graven
images alone. For instance, in Ezekiel, the Lord says that "these
men have set up idols in their hearts." This points to the heart as
the focus of obedience and sin - just as the commandment "Thou
shall not covet..." and emphasizes to us that the Lord is even more
concerned with what goes on in our hearts than the external
appearances of our lives.

Ezekiel 14:3 "“Son of man, these men have set up idols in their
hearts and put wicked stumbling blocks before their faces. Should I
let them inquire of me at all?" ^[[4]](#note-3)^



