**Job**, (Hebrew *Iyyob*) is the principal interlocutor in the book
bearing his name. This book is the most peculiar in the
[canon](Canon "Canon") of Old Testament, peculiar alike for its
setting (otherwise little-mentioned countries), its nomenclature of
personnel (mostly elsewhere quite unmentioned), the predominance of
Satan (who is not even mentioned elsewhere in the canonical Old
Testament), and (perhaps most peculiar of all) making a distinction
between *YHWH* and *elohim*. However, *elohim* is not mentioned by
name in the Book of Job, but instead the *Bene elohim* ('Sons of
God') are (in 1:6).

Its description of Behemoth (in 40:15-24) and of Leviathan (in
41:1-34), however, is somewhat reminiscent of Christian themes;
for, Behemoth "can draw up Jordan" (40:23) rather alike to Joshua
halting that river's flow and to Jesus being baptized in it; and
Leviathan can be made a "banquet of" (41:6) rather alike to the
"marriage supper of the Lamb" (Revelation 19:7-10).

As for the literary style of the *Book of Job*, it is characterized
by long series of religious questions (as in 38:2-39:27), a style
somewhat characteristic of other canonical "Wisdom Literature"
(such as, *Proverbs* 30:4).

Owing to the over-all literary and stylistic peculiarity of the
*Book of Job*, textual critics tend to assign it to a foreign
origin (in 1:1, the book assigns itself to the land of *Uz*:
especially to *edom*^[[1]](#note-0)^, on the basis of *Genesis*
36:28 (where Uz is clan of Edom and of *Lamentations of Jeremiah*
4:21 (where the daughter of Edom is dweller in the land of Uz. One
of the other interlocutors in the *Book of Job*, Eli-hu, is
designated as from Buz, which is mentioned together
with^[[2]](#note-1)^ Te\^ma\> (east of Edom) and Dedan (south of
Edom) in *Jeremiah* 25:23. There was another country, also named
Uz., in Aram (Syria), and favored by^[[3]](#note-2)^
Josephus(*Antiquities of the Jews* 1:145).

## References

1.  [↑](#ref-0) *Wisdom in Ancient Israel*. Cambridge U Pr, 1997.
    p. 56
2.  [↑](#ref-1) Edouard Dhorme (tr. by Harold Knight) :
    *Commentary on the Book of Job*. Thomas Nelson, 1984. p. xxiii
    [[1]](http://www.biblicalhorizons.com/biblical-horizons/130/)
3.  [↑](#ref-2) John E. Hartley : *The Book of Job*. Eerdmans Publ,
    1988. p. 66, fn. 9



