The **Johannine comma**, as it is called, is a sequence of extra
words in 1 John 5:7-8 which appear in some early printed Greek
texts (notably those of [Erasmus](Erasmus "Erasmus")), later
versions of the Latin Vulgate, and in the King James Version of the
Bible. See these words below *in italics* in the KJV and the same
verse from the newer ESV.

-   "For there are three that bear record (witness)
    *in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these three are one. And there are three that bear witness in earth*,
    the spirit, and the water, and the blood: and these three agree in
    one." -1 John 5:7-8, [KJV](KJV "KJV")

-   "For there are three that testify: the Spirit and the water and
    the blood; and these three agree." -1 John 5:7-8, [ESV](ESV "ESV")

## Pre-16th century Greek manuscripts and translations

"These extra words are generally absent from the Greek manuscripts.
In fact, they only appear in the text of four late medieval
manuscripts. They seem to have originated as a marginal note added
to certain Latin manuscripts during the middle ages, which was
eventually incorporated into the text of most of the later Vulgate
manuscripts." [^1]

"The passage is absent from every known Greek manuscript except
eight, and these contain the passage in what appears to be a
translation from a late recension of the Latin Vulgate. Four of the
eight manuscripts contain the passage as a variant reading written
in the margin as a later addition to the manuscript."
[^2]

## Greek fathers

"The passage is quoted by none of the Greek Fathers, who, had they
known it, would most certainly have employed it in the Trinitarian
controversies (Sabellian and Arian). Its first appearance in Greek
is in a Greek version of the (Latin) Acts of the Lateran Council in
1215." [^3]

## The Erasmian promise

> "[Erasmus](Erasmus "Erasmus") promised that he would insert the
Comma Johanneum, as it is called, in future editions if a single
Greek manuscript could be found that contained the passage. At
length such a copy was foundâ€”or made to order." (Bruce Metzger)

However, on pg 291 (n2) of the (new) 3rd edition of
*The Text of the New Testament* Bruce Metzger writes:

> "What is said on p. 101 above about Erasmus' promise to include the Comma
Johanneum if one Greek manuscript were found that contained it, and
his subsequent suspicion that MS. 61 was written expressly to force
him to do so, needs to be corrected in the light of the research of
H.J. de Jonge, a specialist in Erasmian studies who finds no
explicit evidence that supports this frequently made assertion; see
his "Erasmus and the Comma Johanneum", Ephemerides Theologicae
Lovanienses, lvi (1980)," pp 381-9.


* * * * *

In *A History of the Debate over 1 John 5:7,8,* Michael Maynard
records that H.J. de Jonge, the Dean of the Faculty of Theology at
Rijksuniversiteit (Leiden, Netherlands), a recognized specialist in
Erasmian studies, refuted the myth of a promise in 1980, stating
that Metzger's view on Erasmus' promise "has no foundation in
Erasmus' work. Consequently it is highly improbable that he
included the difficult passage because he considered himself bound
by any such promise."

In a letter of June 13, 1995, to Maynard, de Jonge wrote:

> "I have
checked again Erasmus' words quoted by Erika Rummel and her
comments on them in her book *Erasmus' Annotations*. This is what
Erasmus writes [on] in his
*Liber tertius quo respondet ... Ed. Lei*: Erasmus first records
that Lee had reproached him with neglect of the MSS. of 1 John
because Erasmus (according to Lee) had consulted only one MS.
Erasmus replies that he had certainly **not** used only one ms.,
but many copies, first in England, then in Brabant, and finally at
Basle. He cannot accept, therefore, Lee's reproach of negligence
and impiety. 'Is it negligence and impiety, if I did not consult
manuscripts which were simply not within my reach? I have at least
assembled whatever I could assemble. Let Lee produce a Greek MS.
which contains what my edition does not contain and let him show
that that manuscript was within my reach. Only then can he reproach
me with negligence in sacred matters.'

> "From this passage you can see that Erasmus does **not** challenge
Lee to produce a manuscript etc. What Erasmus argues is that Lee
may only reproach Erasmus with negligence of MSS if he demonstrates
that Erasmus **could have** consulted any MS. in which the
*Comma Johanneum* figured. Erasmus does not at all ask for a MS.
containing the *Comma Johanneum*. He denies Lee the right to call
him negligent and impious if the latter does not prove that Erasmus
neglected a manuscript to which he had access.

> "In short, Rummel's interpretation is simply **wrong**. The passage
she quotes has nothing to do with a challenge. Also, she cuts the
quotation short, so that the real sense of the passage becomes
unrecognizable. She is absolutely not justified in speaking of a
challenge in this case or in the case of any other passage on the
subject" (emphasis in original) (de Jonge, cited from
*A History of the Debate over 1 John 5:7,8,* Michael Maynard, p.
383).

## See also

-   [New Testament textual criticism](New_Testament_textual_criticism "New Testament textual criticism")

## External links

-   [The Johannine Comma](http://www.bible-researcher.com/comma.html)

[^1]: http://www.bible-researcher.com/comma.html

[^2]: Ibid.

[^3]: Ibid.