**John Charles Ryle** (May 10, 1816 - June 10, 1900) was an
evangelical [Anglican](Anglican "Anglican") clergyman and first
Bishop of Liverpool. He was renowned for his powerful preaching and
extensive tracts.

## Contents

-   [1 Biography](#Biography)
    -   [1.1 Conversion and ordination](#Conversion_and_ordination)
    -   [1.2 Parish ministry](#Parish_ministry)
    -   [1.3 Episcopate](#Episcopate)

-   [2 Selected works](#Selected_works)
-   [3 Resources](#Resources)
    -   [3.1 Biographies](#Biographies)

-   [4 External links](#External_links)

## Biography

Ryle was born on May 10th, 1816 at Park House, Macclesfield, the
eldest son of John Ryle MP and Susannah Ryle. His family had made
their money in the silk mills of the Industrial Revolution, and
were prominent members of Cheshire society. Accordingly, Ryle was
educated at Eton College and then Christ Church, Oxford, where he
took a congratulatory First in Greats, and a Blue in cricket.

### Conversion and ordination

Ryle's family were nominal Anglicans, and until his time as an
undergraduate Ryle had a similar attitude to Christianity. However,
as he was due to sit his final examinations, he became seriously
ill with a chest infection, and was confined to his bed. During
this time he began to pray and seriously read the Scriptures.
However his conversion occurred when he attended an unknown church,
and arriving late, he heard the reading Ephesians 2:8-9. The force
of these words hit his heart, and from that point on he was assured
of his salvation.

After leaving Oxford, he returned to Macclesfield to assist his
father in business and with the assumption that he would inherit
the estate. However in June 1841 Ryle Senior was bankrupted, and
the family was left ruined, and forced to leave Macclesfield.

With his future now in tatters, Ryle was forced to look for a
profession to sustain himself, and as a last resort, he offered
himself for ministry in the Church of England. He was duly accepted
and ordained in December 1841 by Bishop C.R. Summner of
Winchester.

### Parish ministry

Ryle's first charge was as curate of the hamlet of Exbury in
Hampshire, an area of a rough but sparse agricultural population,
and riddled with disease. After a difficult two years, he became
unwell, and was forced to spend several months recuperating. In
November 1843 he moved to become the rector of St Thomas',
Winchester, where he made a reputation for himself as an energetic
and thorough pastor. Over a period of six months the congregation
grew to well over six hundred communicants, and the church was
forced to consider alternative accommodation. However Ryle was
offered the living of Helmingham, Suffolk, and it was to here that
he moved in 1844, where he stayed until 1861. With a congregation
of some two hundred, it was here that Ryle began to read widely
amongst the Reformed theologians, and produce the writings that
would make him famous. It was at Helmingham that he began his
series of "Expository Thoughts on the Gospels", and started his
tract-writing.

Though his time at Helmingham was extremely fruitful, Ryle
quarreled with the squire John Tollemache, and by 1861 he felt the
need to move on. His final parish incumbency was Stradbroke, also
in Suffolk, and it was from here that Ryle became nationally famed
for his firm preaching and staunch defense of evangelical
principles, both from the study and the platform. He wrote several
well-known books, mainly based on his tracts and sermons, and often
addressing issues of contemporary relevance for the Church from a
Biblical standpoint. Of these, perhaps the most enduring are
"Holiness" and "Practical Religion", both still in print.

### Episcopate

Ryle's uncompromising evangelicalism in the face of increasing
liberal and Tractarian opposition gained him many admirers, and he
was fast becoming one of the leading lights of the evangelical
party. He was originally recommended for the post of Dean of
Salisbury, but before he was appointed the out-going Conservative
Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli offered him the position of Bishop
of the newly-created Diocese of Liverpool.

Ryle moved to Liverpool in 1880, and would stay until 1900. Despite
his previous ministry experience having been almost exclusively
exercised within a rural context, his plain speech and distinctive
principles made him a favorite amongst Liverpool's largely
working-class population. He proved an active bishop, encouraging
the building of more churches and missions to reach out to the
growing urban communities, and generally seeking to develop the new
diocese as best he could.

In common with many late Victorian bishops, Ryle was increasingly
forced to deal with the tensions caused by the developing
Anglo-Catholic wing of the Church of England. Of particular note is
the so-called "Bell Cox Case" of 1885. Bell Cox was vicar of St.
Margaret's, and a committed Ritualist. His Catholic practices soon
came to the attention of several prominent evangelicals in the
city, and one of them, James Hakes of the Liverpool Church
Association, brought a private prosecution against Bell Cox under
the Public Worship and Regulation Act of 1874. Despite Ryle's
entreaties, Bell Cox refused to moderate his behavior, and thus the
case proceeded to the Chancery Court of York, where Bell Cox was
found guilty of contempt of court, and imprisoned for seventeen
days. Ryle's behavior in particular was criticized for his failure
to exercise his legal episcopal veto over the prosecution, and his
apparent willingness to allow one of his clergy to be imprisoned
over matters of worship. However, an examination of letters written
by Ryle from the time suggest that Ryle was by no means a supporter
of such practice, yet felt it wrong to come between the law and the
defendant, particularly in the case of a private prosecution. In
his speech to the Liverpool Diocesan conference the same year he
openly declared the imprisonment of clergy over such matters as
"barbarous", hardly a note of support.

Ryle's tenure as bishop in general is remarkable for his efforts to
build churches and mission halls to reach the rapidly expanding
urban areas of Liverpool. Though subsequent biographers have
criticised this policy, owing to figures which suggest a general
decline in church
attendance,[[[Link title](index.php?title=Link_title&action=edit&redlink=1 "Link title (page does not exist)")]]
it perhaps says most about Ryle's heart as an evangelist; a desire
for all to hear and respond to the Gospel.

Ryle served as Bishop until March 1900, where in his eighty-fourth
year, a stroke and a general decline in health forced him to
retire, despite his desire to die "in harness." He retired to
Lowestoft, Suffolk, however passed away on 10th June 1900. He was
interred in All Saint's, Childwall, next to his third wife,
Henrietta.

## Selected works

Many of Ryle's works are available for free on the Internet.
However, they are also available as regular books from several
publishing houses in the UK and US, as well as in older second-hand
editions.

-   "Expository Thoughts on the Gospels"- Matthew (1856), Mark
    (1857), Luke (2 volumes, 1858-9) and John (3 volumes, 1873).
-   "Holiness (1877)- written in response to the "Higher Life"
    teaching of Robert Pearsall Smith, and adopted by the Keswick
    Movement.
-   "Knots Untied" (1874)- examines disputed points of doctrine and
    Anglican practice from the standpoint of an evangelical.
-   "Practical Religion" (1878)- an examination of the practical
    aspects of Christian living.

## Resources

### Biographies

-   "That Man of Granite with the Heart of a Child: A New Biography
    of J. C. Ryle", Russell, E.; Christian Focus Publications Ltd.,
    (2001).
-   "John Charles Ryle", Loane, M.; Hodder and Stoughton Ltd.,
    (1983).
-   "Faithfulness and Holiness: The Witness of J. C. Ryle", Packer,
    J.; Kingsway Publications, (2002).

## External links

-   [The J. C. Ryle Collection](http://www.biblebb.com/ryle.htm)

-   [John Charles Ryle, Evangelical bishop](http://www.anglicanbooksrevitalized.us/Peter_Toons_Books_Online/History/rylebiog.htm)
    by Peter Toon and Michael Smout
-   [Holiness](http://www.gracegems.org/Ryle/holiness.htm)
-   [► J.C. Ryle Quotes ◄](http://jcrylequotes.com/)



