**John the Baptist** (also known as John the Baptizer) was the son
of Elizabeth and Zechariah the priest. According to the
[Gospel of Luke](Gospel_of_Luke "Gospel of Luke"), He was born to
them, supernaturally, in their old age. He was related by blood to
[Jesus](Jesus "Jesus") through his mother, Elizabeth. According to
Luke, he began his ministry in the 15th year of the reign of Roman
Emperor Tiberius Caesar (which would place it around 28-29 A.D.)

He is also attested to outside the Gospels by Jewish expatriate
[Josephus](Josephus "Josephus"), in his
*Antiquities of the the Jews*:

Now some of the Jews thought that the destruction of Herod's army
came from God, and that very justly, as a punishment of what he did
against John, that was called the Baptist: for Herod slew him, who
was a good man, and commanded the Jews to exercise virtue, both as
to righteousness towards one another, and piety towards God, and so
to come to baptism; for that the washing [with water] would be
acceptable to him, if they made use of it, not in order to the
putting away [or the remission] of some sins [only], but for the
purification of the body; supposing still that the soul was
thoroughly purified beforehand by righteousness. Now when [many]
others came in crowds about him, for they were very greatly moved
[or pleased] by hearing his words, Herod, who feared lest the great
influence John had over the people might put it into his power and
inclination to raise a rebellion, (for they seemed ready to do any
thing he should advise,) thought it best, by putting him to death,
to prevent any mischief he might cause, and not bring himself into
difficulties, by sparing a man who might make him repent of it when
it would be too late. Accordingly he was sent a prisoner, out of
Herod's suspicious temper, to Macherus, the castle I before
mentioned, and was there put to death. Now the Jews had an opinion
that the destruction of this army was sent as a punishment upon
Herod, and a mark of God's displeasure to him. (Whiston
Translation)
[[1]](http://earlychristianwritings.com/text/josephus/ant-18.htm)
*This article is a **[stub](http://www.theopedia.com/Category:Theopedia_stubs "Category:Theopedia stubs")**. Please edit it to add information.*
## References

-   [Josephus' Antiquities](http://earlychristianwritings.com/text/josephus/ant-18.htm)
    (earlychristianwritings.com)

## External links

-   [John the Baptist](http://www.bible.org/page.asp?page_id=586)
    (Bible.org)



