**John Huss** (1369 Southern Bohemia – July 6, 1415 Constance) was
a religious thinker and reformer. He initiated a religious movement
based on the ideas of
[John Wycliffe](John_Wycliffe "John Wycliffe"). His followers
became known as Hussites. The
[Catholic Church](Catholic_Church "Catholic Church") did not
condone such uprisings, and Hus was excommunicated in 1411,
condemned by the Council of Constance, and burned at the stake.

## Influence of Wycliffe in Bohemia

Huss was a precursor to the [Protestant](Protestant "Protestant")
movement. The theological writings of
[John Wycliffe](John_Wycliffe "John Wycliffe") spread widely in
Bohemia. They had been brought over, as is said, in 1401 or 1402 by
Jerome of Prague, and Huss was greatly moved by them. The
university arose against the spread of the new doctrines, and in
1403 prohibited a disputation on forty-five theses taken in part
from Wycliffe. Under Archbishop Zbyněk Zajíc (from 1403), Huss
initially enjoyed a great reputation. In 1405 he was active as a
synodical preacher, but the bishop was compelled to depose him on
account of his severe attacks upon the clergy.

The doctrinal views of Wycliffe had spread over the whole country.
As long as Zbyněk Zajíc remained obedient to Gregory XII, all
opposition to the new spirit was in vain; but as soon as he
submitted to Alexander V, conditions changed. The archbishop
brought his complaints before the papal see, accusing the
Wycliffites as the instigators of all ecclesiastical disturbances
in Bohemia. Thereupon the pope issued his bull of December 20,
1409, which empowered the archbishop to proceed against Wycliffism
— all books of Wycliffe were to be given up, his doctrines revoked,
and free preaching discontinued. After the publication of the bull
in 1410, Huss appealed to the pope, but in vain. All books and
valuable manuscripts of Wycliffe were burned, and Huss and his
adherents put under the ban. This procedure caused an indescribable
commotion among the people down to the lowest classes; in some
places turbulent scenes occurred.

The government took the part of Huss, and the power of his
adherents increased from day to day. He continued to preach in the
Bethlehem chapel, and became bolder and bolder in his accusations
of the Church. The churches of the city were put under the ban, and
the interdict was pronounced against Prague, but without result.

## His trial and execution

The Council of Constance was convened in 1414, and he was summoned
before it, to answer to the charges brought against him, having
been promised the safe conduct, or passport of the Emperor
Sigismond. But the Emperor proved false to his word, and the
council was determined to condemn him. He was declared a heretic,
given the opportunity to recant and sentenced to be burned at the
stake. On the 6th day of July, 1415, he was led forth and burned at
the stake.

*Portions of this material have been adapted from the [Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge](Schaff-Herzog_Encyclopedia_of_Religious_Knowledge "Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge") (public domain). Go [here](http://www.ccel.org/php/disp.php?a=schaff&b=encyc05&p=415) for more detailed biography.*

## External links

-   [Final Declaration](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/1415janhus.html)
    written on July 1st, 1415
-   [John Huss, a biography](http://logosresourcepages.org/History/huss_b.htm)
-   [John Huss and the Hussite Wars](http://www.bereanbeacon.org/history/history/john_huss_and_hussite_wars.htm)
-   [The Hussite Wars brought on by the Execution of John Huss](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hussite_Wars)



