**John Miley** (1813-1895) was a Christian theologian in the
[Methodist](Methodism "Methodism") tradition who was one of the
major Methodist theological voices of the 19th century.

Miley had graduated from Augusta College and, as a Methodist
pastor, had held nineteen different pastoral appointments. He
served as chair of systematic theology at Drew University in
Madison, NJ beginning in 1873, after his brother-in-law, Randolph
Sinks Foster, left the seat to become a Bishop.

Miley was one of "the Great Five" revered professors who led Drew
for decades, along with Henry Anson Buttz, George Crooks, James
Strong, and Samuel Upham. He viewed the theology of John Wesley as
foundationally excellent but in need of an update for the modern
world, and endeavored to do so.

He was the author of *Systematic Theology* (1892,
[ISBN 0943575095](http://www.theopedia.com/Special:BookSources/0943575095)),
a two-volume work which served as a key text for Methodist
seminarians for decades. He also authored *The Atonement in Christ*
(1879), in which he demonstrated what he believed were severe
Biblical and theological problems with commonly held theories on
the doctrine of the atonement such as the *punishment* or
*[penal substitution](Penal_substitution "Penal substitution")*
view of [Calvinism](Calvinism "Calvinism") and the *moral example*
view of Pierre Ablard, developing a strong *moral government*
theology which was thoroughly [Wesleyan](John_Wesley "John Wesley")
and [Arminian](Arminianism "Arminianism"), heavily reliant on the
work of Hugo Grotius. The book remains one of the most important
works regarding [atonement theology](Atonement "Atonement").



