Formulated April 20, 1996, by a group of conservative evangelical
theologians and pastors,
**The Cambridge Declaration of the [Alliance of Confessing Evangelicals](Alliance_of_Confessing_Evangelicals "Alliance of Confessing Evangelicals")**
is a call to recover the historic Christian faith. The
[Five Solas](Five_Solas "Five Solas") of the sixteenth century
Protestant [Reformation](Reformation "Reformation") form the
outline of the declaration.

## Contents

-   [1 The text](#The_text)
    -   [1.1 Sola Scriptura: The Erosion Of Authority](#Sola_Scriptura:_The_Erosion_Of_Authority)
    -   [1.2 Thesis One: Sola Scriptura](#Thesis_One:_Sola_Scriptura)
    -   [1.3 Solus Christus: The Erosion Of Christ-Centered Faith](#Solus_Christus:_The_Erosion_Of_Christ-Centered_Faith)
    -   [1.4 Thesis Two: Solus Christus](#Thesis_Two:_Solus_Christus)
    -   [1.5 Sola Gratia: The Erosion Of The Gospel](#Sola_Gratia:_The_Erosion_Of_The_Gospel)
    -   [1.6 Thesis Three: Sola Gratia](#Thesis_Three:_Sola_Gratia)
    -   [1.7 Sola Fide: The Erosion Of The Chief Article](#Sola_Fide:_The_Erosion_Of_The_Chief_Article)
    -   [1.8 Thesis Four: Sola Fide](#Thesis_Four:_Sola_Fide)
    -   [1.9 Soli Deo Gloria: The Erosion Of God-Centered Worship](#Soli_Deo_Gloria:_The_Erosion_Of_God-Centered_Worship)
    -   [1.10 Thesis Five: Soli Deo Gloria](#Thesis_Five:_Soli_Deo_Gloria)
    -   [1.11 Call To Repentance And Reformation](#Call_To_Repentance_And_Reformation)
    -   [1.12 ACE Council Members](#ACE_Council_Members)

-   [2 External links](#External_links)

## The text

Evangelical churches today are increasingly dominated by the spirit
of this age rather than by the Spirit of Christ. As evangelicals,
we call ourselves to repent of this sin and to recover the historic
Christian faith.

In the course of history words change. In our day this has happened
to the word "evangelical." In the past it served as a bond of unity
between Christians from a wide diversity of church traditions.
Historic evangelicalism was confessional. It embraced the essential
truths of Christianity as those were defined by the great
ecumenical councils of the church. In addition, evangelicals also
shared a common heritage in the "solas" of the sixteenth century
Protestant Reformation.

Today the light of the Reformation has been significantly dimmed.
The consequence is that the word "evangelical" has become so
inclusive as to have lost its meaning. We face the peril of losing
the unity it has taken centuries to achieve. Because of this crisis
and because of our love of Christ, his gospel and his church, we
endeavor to assert anew our commitment to the central truths of the
Reformation and of historic evangelicalism. These truths we affirm
not because of their role in our traditions, but because we believe
that they are central to the Bible.

### Sola Scriptura: The Erosion Of Authority

Scripture alone is the inerrant rule of the church's life, but the
evangelical church today has separated Scripture from its
authoritative function. In practice, the church is guided, far too
often, by the culture. Therapeutic technique, marketing strategies,
and the beat of the entertainment world often have far more to say
about what the church wants, how it functions and what it offers,
than does the Word of God. Pastors have neglected their rightful
oversight of worship, including the doctrinal content of the music.
As biblical authority has been abandoned in practice, as its truths
have faded from Christian consciousness, and as its doctrines have
lost their saliency, the church has been increasingly emptied of
its integrity, moral authority and direction.

Rather than adapting Christian faith to satisfy the felt needs of
consumers, we must proclaim the law as the only measure of true
righteousness and the gospel as the only announcement of saving
truth. Biblical truth is indispensable to the church's
understanding, nurture and discipline.

Scripture must take us beyond our perceived needs to our real needs
and liberate us from seeing ourselves through the seductive images,
cliche's, promises. and priorities of mass culture. It is only in
the light of God's truth that we understand ourselves aright and
see God's provision for our need. The Bible, therefore, must be
taught and preached in the church. Sermons must be expositions of
the Bible and its teachings, not expressions of the preachers
opinions or the ideas of the age. We must settle for nothing less
than what God has given.

The work of the Holy Spirit in personal experience cannot be
disengaged from Scripture. The Spirit does not speak in ways that
are independent of Scripture. Apart from Scripture we would never
have known of God's grace in Christ. The biblical Word, rather than
spiritual experience, is the test of truth.

### Thesis One: Sola Scriptura

We reaffirm the inerrant Scripture to be the sole source of written
divine revelation, which alone can bind the conscience. The Bible
alone teaches all that is necessary for our salvation from sin and
is the standard by which all Christian behavior must be measured.
We deny that any creed, council or individual may bind a
Christian's conscience, that the Holy Spirit speaks independently
of or contrary to what is set forth in the Bible, or that personal
spiritual experience can ever be a vehicle of revelation.

### Solus Christus: The Erosion Of Christ-Centered Faith

As evangelical faith becomes secularized, its interests have been
blurred with those of the culture. The result is a loss of absolute
values, permissive individualism, and a substitution of wholeness
for holiness, recovery for repentance, intuition for truth, feeling
for belief, chance for providence, and immediate gratification for
enduring hope. Christ and his cross have moved from the center of
our vision.

### Thesis Two: Solus Christus

We reaffirm that our salvation is accomplished by the mediatorial
work of the historical Christ alone. His sinless life and
substitutionary atonement alone are sufficient for our
justification and reconciliation to the Father.

We deny that the gospel is preached if Christ's substitutionary
work is not declared and faith in Christ and his work is not
solicited.

### Sola Gratia: The Erosion Of The Gospel

Unwarranted confidence in human ability is a product of fallen
human nature. This false confidence now fills the evangelical
world; from the self-esteem gospel, to the health and wealth
gospel, from those who have transformed the gospel into a product
to be sold and sinners into consumers who want to buy, to others
who treat Christian faith as being true simply because it works.
This silences the doctrine of justification regardless of the
official commitments of our churches.

God's grace in Christ is not merely necessary but is the sole
efficient cause of salvation. We confess that human beings are born
spiritually dead and are incapable even of cooperating with
regenerating grace.

### Thesis Three: Sola Gratia

We reaffirm that in salvation we are rescued from God's wrath by
his grace alone. It is the supernatural work of the Holy Spirit
that brings us to Christ by releasing us from our bondage to sin
and raising us from spiritual death to spiritual life.

We deny that salvation is in any sense a human work. Human methods,
techniques or strategies by themselves cannot accomplish this
transformation. Faith is not produced by our unregenerated human
nature.

### Sola Fide: The Erosion Of The Chief Article

Justification is by grace alone through faith alone because of
Christ alone. This is the article by which the church stands or
falls. Today this article is often ignored, distorted or sometimes
even denied by leaders, scholars and pastors who claim to be
evangelical. Although fallen human nature has always recoiled from
recognizing its need for Christ's imputed righteousness, modernity
greatly fuels the fires of this discontent with the biblical
Gospel. We have allowed this discontent to dictate the nature of
our ministry and what it is we are preaching.

Many in the church growth movement believe that sociological
understanding of those in the pew is as important to the success of
the gospel as is the biblical truth which is proclaimed. As a
result, theological convictions are frequently divorced from the
work of the ministry. The marketing orientation in many churches
takes this even further, erasing the distinction between the
biblical Word and the world, robbing Christ's cross of its offense,
and reducing Christian faith to the principles and methods which
bring success to secular corporations.

While the theology of the cross may be believed, these movements
are actually emptying it of its meaning. There is no gospel except
that of Christ's substitution in our place whereby God imputed to
him our sin and imputed to us his righteousness. Because he bore
our judgment, we now walk in his grace as those who are forever
pardoned, accepted and adopted as God's children. There is no basis
for our acceptance before God except in Christ's saving work, not
in our patriotism, churchly devotion or moral decency. The gospel
declares what God has done for us in Christ. It is not about what
we can do to reach him.

### Thesis Four: Sola Fide

We reaffirm that justification is by grace alone through faith
alone because of Christ alone. In justification Christ's
righteousness is imputed to us as the only possible satisfaction of
God's perfect justice.

We deny that justification rests on any merit to be found in us, or
upon the grounds of an infusion of Christ's righteousness in us, or
that an institution claiming to be a church that denies or condemns
sola fide can be recognized as a legitimate church.

### Soli Deo Gloria: The Erosion Of God-Centered Worship

Wherever in the church biblical authority has been lost, Christ has
been displaced, the gospel has been distorted, or faith has been
perverted, it has always been for one reason: our interests have
displaced God's and we are doing his work in our way. The loss of
God's centrality in the life of today's church is common and
lamentable. It is this loss that allows us to transform worship
into entertainment, gospel preaching into marketing, believing into
technique, being good into feeling good about ourselves, and
faithfulness into being successful. As a result, God, Christ and
the Bible have come to mean too little to us and rest too
inconsequentially upon us.

God does not exist to satisfy human ambitions, cravings, the
appetite for consumption, or our own private spiritual interests.
We must focus on God in our worship, rather than the satisfaction
of our personal needs. God is sovereign in worship; we are not. Our
concern must be for God's kingdom, not our own empires, popularity
or success.

### Thesis Five: Soli Deo Gloria

We reaffirm that because salvation is of God and has been
accomplished by God, it is for God's glory and that we must glorify
him always. We must live our entire lives before the face of God,
under the authority of God and for his glory alone. We deny that we
can properly glorify God if our worship is confused with
entertainment, if we neglect either Law or Gospel in our preaching,
or if self-improvement, self-esteem or self- fulfillment are
allowed to become alternatives to the gospel.

### Call To Repentance And Reformation

The faithfulness of the evangelical church in the past contrasts
sharply with its unfaithfulness in the present. Earlier in this
century, evangelical churches sustained a remarkable missionary
endeavor, and built many religious institutions to serve the cause
of biblical truth and Christ's kingdom. That was a time when
Christian behavior and expectations were markedly different from
those in the culture. Today they often are not. The evangelical
world today is losing its biblical fidelity, moral compass and
missionary zeal.

We repent of our worldliness. We have been influenced by the
"gospels" of our secular culture, which are no gospels. We have
weakened the church by our own lack of serious repentance, our
blindness to the sins in ourselves which we see so clearly in
others, and our inexcusable failure adequately to tell others about
God's saving work in Jesus Christ.

We also earnestly call back erring professing evangelicals who have
deviated from God's Word in the matters discussed in this
Declaration. This includes those who declare that there is hope of
eternal life apart from explicit faith in Jesus Christ, who claim
that those who reject Christ in this life will be annihilated
rather than endure the just judgment of God through eternal
suffering, or who claim that evangelicals and Roman Catholics are
one in Jesus Christ even where the biblical doctrine of
justification is not believed.

The Alliance of Confessing Evangelicals asks all Christians to give
consideration to implementing this Declaration in the church's
worship, ministry, policies, life and evangelism. For Christ's
sake. Amen.

### ACE Council Members

The ACE coucil members as the time of the declaration were:

-   Dr. John Armstrong
-   Rev. Alistair Begg
-   Dr. James M. Boice
-   Dr. W. Robert Godfrey
-   Dr. John D. Hannah
-   Dr. Michael S. Horton
-   Mrs. Rosemary Jensen
-   Dr. R. Albert Mohler Jr.
-   Dr. Robert M. Norris
-   Dr. R. C. Sproul
-   Dr. G. Edward Veith
-   Dr. David Wells
-   Dr. Luder Whitlock
-   Dr. J. A. O. Preus, III

## External links

-   [The Cambridge Declaration](http://www.alliancenet.org/partner/Article_Display_Page/0,,PTID307086%7CCHID798774%7CCIID1411364,00.html)
    at alliancenet.org.
-   [Alliance of Confessing Evangelicals](http://www.alliancenet.org/partner/0,,307086,00.html)
    home page.



