## Contents

-   [1 The text](#The_text)
    -   [1.1 Article I](#Article_I)
    -   [1.2 Article II](#Article_II)
    -   [1.3 Article III](#Article_III)
    -   [1.4 Article IV](#Article_IV)
    -   [1.5 Article V](#Article_V)
    -   [1.6 Article VI](#Article_VI)
    -   [1.7 Article VIII](#Article_VIII)
    -   [1.8 Article IX](#Article_IX)
    -   [1.9 Article X](#Article_X)
    -   [1.10 Article XI](#Article_XI)
    -   [1.11 Article XII](#Article_XII)
    -   [1.12 Article XIII](#Article_XIII)
    -   [1.13 Article XIV](#Article_XIV)
    -   [1.14 Article XV](#Article_XV)
    -   [1.15 Article XVI](#Article_XVI)
    -   [1.16 Article XVII](#Article_XVII)
    -   [1.17 Article XVIII](#Article_XVIII)

-   [2 Signers](#Signers)

## The text

We are brothers in Christ united in one great cause – to stand
together for the Gospel. We are convinced that the Gospel of Jesus
Christ has been misrepresented, misunderstood, and marginalized in
many churches and among many who claim the name of Christ.
Compromise of the Gospel has led to the preaching of false gospels,
the seduction of many minds and movements, and the weakening of the
church's Gospel witness.

As in previous moments of theological and spiritual crisis in the
church, we believe that the answer to this confusion and compromise
lies in a comprehensive recovery and reaffirmation of the Gospel –
and in Christians banding together in Gospel churches that display
God's glory in this fallen world.

We are also brothers united in deep concern for the church and the
Gospel. This concern is specifically addressed to certain trends
within the church today. We are concerned about the tendency of so
many churches to substitute technique for truth, therapy for
theology, and management for ministry.

We are also concerned that God's glorious purpose for Christ's
church is often eclipsed in concern by so many other issues,
programs, technologies, and priorities. Furthermore, confusion over
crucial questions concerning the authority of the Bible, the
meaning of the Gospel, and the nature of truth itself have gravely
weakened the church in terms of its witness, its work, and its
identity.

We stand together for the Gospel – and for a full and gladdening
recovery of the Gospel in the church. We are convinced that such a
recovery will be evident in the form of faithful Gospel churches,
each bearing faithful witness to the glory of God and the power of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

### Article I

We affirm that the sole authority for the Church is the Bible,
verbally inspired, inerrant, infallible, and totally sufficient and
trustworthy.

We deny that the Bible is a mere witness to the divine revelation,
or that any portion of Scripture is marked by error or the effects
of human sinfulness.

### Article II

We affirm that the authority and sufficiency of Scripture extends
to the entire Bible, and therefore that the Bible is our final
authority for all doctrine and practice.

We deny that any portion of the Bible is to be used in an effort to
deny the truthfulness or trustworthiness of any other portion. We
further deny any effort to identify a canon within the canon or,
for example, to set the words of Jesus against the writings of
Paul.

### Article III

We affirm that truth ever remains a central issue for the Church,
and that the church must resist the allure of pragmatism and
postmodern conceptions of truth as substitutes for obedience to the
comprehensive truth claims of Scripture.

We deny that truth is merely a product of social construction or
that the truth of the Gospel can be expressed or grounded in
anything less than total confidence in the veracity of the Bible,
the historicity of biblical events, and the ability of language to
convey understandable truth in sentence form. We further deny that
the church can establish its ministry on a foundation of
pragmatism, current marketing techniques, or contemporary cultural
fashions.

### Article IV

We affirm the centrality of expository preaching in the church and
the urgent need for a recovery of biblical exposition and the
public reading of Scripture in worship.

We deny that God-honoring worship can marginalize or neglect the
ministry of the Word as manifested through exposition and public
reading. We further deny that a church devoid of true biblical
preaching can survive as a Gospel church.

### Article V

We affirm that the Bible reveals God to be infinite in all his
perfections, and thus truly omniscient, omnipotent, timeless, and
self-existent. We further affirm that God possesses perfect
knowledge of all things, past, present, and future, including all
human thoughts, acts, and decisions.

We deny that the God of the Bible is in any way limited in terms of
knowledge or power or any other perfection or attribute, or that
God has in any way limited his own perfections.

### Article VI

We affirm that the doctrine of the Trinity is a Christian
essential, bearing witness to the ontological reality of the one
true God in three divine persons, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,
each of the same substance and perfections.

We deny the claim that the Trinity is not an essential doctrine, or
that the Trinity can be understood in merely economic or functional
categories.

We affirm that Jesus Christ is true God and true Man, in perfect,
undiluted, and unconfused union throughout his incarnation and now
eternally. We also affirm that Christ died on the cross as a
substitute for sinners, as a sacrifice for sin, and as a
propitiation of the wrath of God toward sinners. We affirm the
death, burial, and bodily resurrection of Christ as essential to
the Gospel. We further affirm that Jesus Christ is Lord over His
church, and that Christ will reign over the entire cosmos in
fulfillment of the Father's gracious purpose.

We deny that the substitutionary character of Christ's atonement
for sin can be compromised without serious injury to the Gospel or
denied without repudiating the Gospel. We further deny that Jesus
Christ is visible only in weakness, rather than in power, Lordship,
or royal reign, or, conversely, that Christ is visible only in
power, and never in weakness.

### Article VIII

We affirm that salvation is all of grace, and that the Gospel is
revealed to us in doctrines that most faithfully exalt God's
sovereign purpose to save sinners and in His determination to save
his redeemed people by grace alone, through faith alone, in Christ
alone, to His glory alone.

We deny that any teaching, theological system, or means of
presenting the Gospel that denies the centrality of God's grace as
His gift of unmerited favor to sinners in Christ can be considered
true doctrine.

### Article IX

We affirm that the Gospel of Jesus Christ is God's means of
bringing salvation to His people, that sinners are commanded to
believe the Gospel, and that the church is commissioned to preach
and teach the Gospel to all nations.

We deny that evangelism can be reduced to any program, technique,
or marketing approach. We further deny that salvation can be
separated from repentance toward God and faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ.

### Article X

We affirm that salvation comes to those who truly believe and
confess that Jesus Christ is Lord. We deny that there is salvation
in any other name, or that saving faith can take any form other
than conscious belief in the Lord Jesus Christ and His saving
acts.

### Article XI

We affirm the continuity of God's saving purpose and the
Christological unity of the covenants. We further affirm a basic
distinction between law and grace, and that the true Gospel exalts
Christ's atoning work as the consummate and perfect fulfillment of
the law.

We deny that the Bible presents any other means of salvation than
God's gracious acceptance of sinners in Christ.

### Article XII

We affirm that sinners are justified only through faith in Christ,
and that justification by faith alone is both essential and central
to the Gospel.

We deny that any teaching that minimizes, denies, or confuses
justification by faith alone can be considered true to the Gospel.
We further deny that any teaching that separates regeneration and
faith is a true rendering of the Gospel.

### Article XIII

We affirm that the righteousness of Christ is imputed to believers
by God's decree alone, and that this righteousness, imputed to the
believer through faith alone, is the only righteousness that
justifies.

We deny that such righteousness is earned or deserved in any
manner, is infused within the believer to any degree, or is
realized in the believer through anything other than faith alone.

### Article XIV

We affirm that the shape of Christian discipleship is
congregational, and that God's purpose is evident in faithful
Gospel congregations, each displaying God's glory in the marks of
authentic ecclesiology. We deny that any Christian can truly be a
faithful disciple apart from the teaching, discipline, fellowship,
and accountability of a congregation of fellow disciples, organized
as a Gospel church. We further deny that the Lord's Supper can
faithfully be administered apart from the right practice of church
discipline.

### Article XV

We affirm that evangelical congregations are to work together in
humble and voluntary cooperation and that the spiritual fellowship
of Gospel congregations bears witness to the unity of the Church
and the glory of God.

We deny that loyalty to any denomination or fellowship of churches
can take precedence over the claims of truth and faithfulness to
the Gospel.

### Article XVI

We affirm that the Scripture reveals a pattern of complementary
order between men and women, and that this order is itself a
testimony to the Gospel, even as it is the gift of our Creator and
Redeemer. We also affirm that all Christians are called to service
within the body of Christ, and that God has given to both men and
women important and strategic roles within the home, the church,
and the society. We further affirm that the teaching office of the
church is assigned only to those men who are called of God in
fulfillment of the biblical teachings and that men are to lead in
their homes as husbands and fathers who fear and love God.

We deny that the distinction of roles between men and women
revealed in the Bible is evidence of mere cultural conditioning or
a manifestation of male oppression or prejudice against women. We
also deny that this biblical distinction of roles excludes women
from meaningful ministry in Christ's kingdom. We further deny that
any church can confuse these issues without damaging its witness to
the Gospel.

### Article XVII

We affirm that God calls his people to display his glory in the
reconciliation of the nations within the Church, and that God's
pleasure in this reconciliation is evident in the gathering of
believers from every tongue and tribe and people and nation. We
acknowledge that the staggering magnitude of injustice against
African-Americans in the name of the Gospel presents a special
opportunity for displaying the repentance, forgiveness, and
restoration promised in the Gospel. We further affirm that
evangelical Christianity in America bears a unique responsibility
to demonstrate this reconciliation with our African-American
brothers and sisters.

We deny that any church can accept racial prejudice,
discrimination, or division without betraying the Gospel.

### Article XVIII

We affirm that our only sure and confident hope is in the sure and
certain promises of God. Thus, our hope is an eschatological hope,
grounded in our confidence that God will bring all things to
consummation in a manner that will bring greatest glory to his own
name, greatest preeminence to his Son, and greatest joy for his
redeemed people.

We deny that we are to find ultimate fulfillment or happiness in
this world, or that God's ultimate purpose is for us to find merely
a more meaningful and fulfilling life in this fallen world. We
further deny that any teaching that offers health and wealth as
God's assured promises in this life can be considered a true
gospel.

---

Now I would remind you, brothers, of the gospel I preached to you,
which you received, in which you stand, and by which you are being
saved, if you hold fast to the word I preached to you – unless you
believed in vain. For I delivered to you as of first importance
what I also received: that Christ died for our sins in accordance
with the Scriptures, that he was buried, that he was raised on the
third day in accordance with the Scriptures. I Corinthians 15:1-4

Then I saw another angel flying directly overhead, with an eternal
gospel to proclaim to those who dwell on earth, to every nation and
tribe and language and people. And he said with a loud voice, "Fear
God and give him glory, because the hour of his judgment has come,
and worship him who made heaven and earth, the sea and the springs
of water." Revelation 14:6-7

## Signers

-   [J. Ligon Duncan](index.php?title=J._Ligon_Duncan&action=edit&redlink=1 "J. Ligon Duncan (page does not exist)")
-   [Mark Dever](Mark_Dever "Mark Dever")
-   [C.J. Mahaney](C.J._Mahaney "C.J. Mahaney")
-   [Albert Mohler](Albert_Mohler "Albert Mohler")
-   [John MacArthur](John_MacArthur "John MacArthur")
-   [John Piper](John_Piper "John Piper")
-   [R.C. Sproul](R.C._Sproul "R.C. Sproul")



