**Truth** in essence is conformity to fact, reality, or actuality.
*Truth* is often that which is considered to be the supreme reality
and to have the ultimate meaning and value of existence. Christians
generally regard the [Bible](Bible "Bible") as communicating the
*truth* about [God](God "God") and spiritual things, answering the
ultimate questions of life and meaning in this world.

**Multimedia**

-   [Current Attacks on Truth](http://www.euroleadershipresources.org/Media/Audio/Stefan_Gustavsson-Current_attacks_on_truth.mp3),
    (mp3) by Stefan Gustavsson

## Contents

-   [1 The Nature of Truth](#The_Nature_of_Truth)
    -   [1.1 The Importance of the Nature of Truth](#The_Importance_of_the_Nature_of_Truth)

-   [2 What Truth Is Not...](#What_Truth_Is_Not...)
    -   [2.1 Truth is not "what works."](#Truth_is_not_.22what_works..22)
    -   [2.2 Truth is not "that which coheres."](#Truth_is_not_.22that_which_coheres..22)
    -   [2.3 Truth is not "what is comprehensive."](#Truth_is_not_.22what_is_comprehensive..22)
    -   [2.4 Truth is not "what is existentially relevant."](#Truth_is_not_.22what_is_existentially_relevant..22)
    -   [2.5 Truths is not "what feels good."](#Truths_is_not_.22what_feels_good..22)

-   [3 What Truth Is](#What_Truth_Is)
    -   [3.1 Correspondence with Reality](#Correspondence_with_Reality)
        -   [3.1.1 Arguments for Correspondence](#Arguments_for_Correspondence)
        -   [3.1.2 Objections to Correspondence](#Objections_to_Correspondence)


-   [4 The Absolute Nature of Truth](#The_Absolute_Nature_of_Truth)
    -   [4.1 Relative Truth](#Relative_Truth)

-   [5 Evaluation](#Evaluation)
    -   [5.1 Absolutely Relative?](#Absolutely_Relative.3F)
    -   [5.2 A World of Contradictions](#A_World_of_Contradictions)
    -   [5.3 No Wrongs and No Rights](#No_Wrongs_and_No_Rights)

-   [6 Answering Objections](#Answering_Objections)
    -   [6.1 No Absolute Knowledge](#No_Absolute_Knowledge)
    -   [6.2 In-between Truths](#In-between_Truths)
    -   [6.3 No New Truth (or Progress)](#No_New_Truth_.28or_Progress.29)
    -   [6.4 Truth and Growth in Knowledge](#Truth_and_Growth_in_Knowledge)
    -   [6.5 Narrow Absolutes](#Narrow_Absolutes)
    -   [6.6 Dogmatic Absolutes](#Dogmatic_Absolutes)

-   [7 Summary](#Summary)
-   [8 Footnotes](#Footnotes)
-   [9 See also](#See_also)
-   [10 External links](#External_links)



## The Nature of Truth

[Pilate](Pontius_Pilate "Pontius Pilate") asked: What is truth?
Philosophers from Socrates to the last century answered: Is it
absolute? Is it knowable? And does it correspond to a referent or,
in the case of metaphysical truth, does it correspond to
reality?^[[1]](#note-0)^

### The Importance of the Nature of Truth

The nature of truth is crucial to the Christian faith. Not only
does Christianity claim there is absolute truth (truth for
everyone, everywhere, at all times), but it insists that truth
about the world (reality) is that which corresponds to the way
things really are.^[[2]](#note-1)^ For example, the statement "God
Exists" means that there really is a God outside the universe, an
extracosmic Being. Likewise, the claim that "God raised Christ from
the dead" means that the dead corpse of Jesus of Nazareth
supernaturally vacated its tomb alive a few days after its burial.
Christian truth claims really correspond to the state of affairs
about which they claim to inform us.^[[3]](#note-2)^

## What Truth Is Not...

Truth can be understood both from what it is and from what it is
not. There are many inadequate views of the nature of truth. Most
of these result from a confusion between the nature (definition) of
truth and a test (defense) of truth, or from not distinguishing the
result from the rule.

### Truth is not "what works."

One popular theory is the pragmatic view of
[w:William James](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_James "w:William James")
and his followers that truth is what works. According to James,
"Truth is the expedient in the way of knowing. A statement is known
to be true if it brings the right results. It is the expedient as
confirmed by future experience."^[[4]](#note-3)^ That this is
inadequate is evident from its confusion of cause and effect. If
something is true it will work, at least in the long run. But
simply because something works does not make it true. This is not
how truth is understood in court. Judges tend to regard the
expedient as perjury. Finally, the results do not settle the truth
question. Even when results are in, one can still ask whether the
initial statement corresponded to the facts. If it did not, it was
not true, regardless of the results.

### Truth is not "that which coheres."

Some thinkers have suggested that truth is what is internally
consistent; it is coherent and self-consistent. But this too is an
inadequate definition. Empty statements hang together, even though
they are devoid of truth content. "All wives are married women" is
internally consistent, but it is empty. It tells us nothing about
reality. The statement would be so, even if there were no wives. It
really means, "*If* there is a wife, then she must be married." But
it does not inform us that there is a wife anywhere in the
universe. A set of false statements also can be internally
consistent. If several witnesses conspire to misrepresent the
facts, their story may cohere better than if they were honestly
trying to reconstruct the truth. But it still is a lie. At best,
coherence is a negative test of truth. Statements are wrong if they
are inconsistent, but not necessarily true if they
are.^[[5]](#note-4)^

### Truth is not "what is comprehensive."

Another idea is that the view that explains the most data is true.
And those that are not as comprehensive are not true - or not
*as true*. Comprehensiveness is one test for truth, but not the
definition of truth. Certainly a good theory will explain all
relevant data. And a true worldview will be comprehensive. However,
this is only a negative test of whether it is true. The
affirmations of that view must still correspond with the real state
of affairs. If a view was true simply because it was more
encyclopedic, then a comprehensive statement of error would be true
and a digested presentation of truth automatically would be in
error. Not all long-winded presentations are true and concise ones
are not all false. One can have a comprehensive view of what is
false or a superficial or incomplete view of what is
true.^[[6]](#note-5)^

### Truth is not "what is existentially relevant."

Following
[SÃ¸ren Kierkegaard](Soren_Kierkegaard "Soren Kierkegaard") and
other existential philosophers, some have insisted that truth is
what is relevant to our existence or life and false if it is not.
Truth is subjectivity, Kierkegaard said; truth is livable.
^[[7]](#note-6)^ As
[w:Martin Buber](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martin_Buber "w:Martin Buber")
stated, truth is found in persons, not in
propositions.^[[8]](#note-7)^

However, even if truth is existential in some sense, not all truth
fits into the existential category. There are many kinds of truth,
physical, mathematical, historical, and theoretical. But if truth
by its very nature is found only subjectively in existential
relevance, then none of these could be true. What is true will be
relevant, but not everything relevant is true. A pen is relevant to
an atheist writer. And a gun is relevant to a murderer. But this
does not make the former true or the latter good. A truth about
life will be relevant to life. But not everything relevant to one's
life will be true.^[[9]](#note-8)^

### Truths is not "what feels good."

The popular subjective view is that truth gives a satisfying
feeling, and error feels bad. Truth is found in our subjective
feelings.^[[10]](#note-9)^ Many
[mystics](index.php?title=Mystics&action=edit&redlink=1 "Mystics (page does not exist)")
and
[new age](index.php?title=New_age&action=edit&redlink=1 "New age (page does not exist)")
enthusiasts hold versions of this faulty view, though it also has a
strong influence among some experientially oriented Christian
groups.

It is evident that bad news can be true. But if what feels good is
always true, then we would not have to believe anything unpleasant.
Bad report cards do not make a student feel good, but the student
refuses to believe them at his or her academic peril. They are
true. Feelings are also relative to individual personalities. What
feels good to one may feel bad to another. If so, then truth would
be highly relative. But, as will be seen in some detail below,
truth cannot be relative.^[[11]](#note-10)^

Even if truth makes us feel good - at least in the long run - this
does not mean that what feels good is true. The nature of truth
does not depend on the result of truth.

## What Truth Is

### Correspondence with Reality

Now that the inadequate views of the nature of truth have been
examined, it remains to state an adequate view. Truth is what
corresponds to its referent. Truth about reality is what
corresponds to the way things really are. Truth is "telling it like
it is." This correspondence applies to abstract realities as well
as actual ones. There are mathematical truths. There are also
truths about ideas. In each case there is a reality, and truth
accurately expresses it.

Falsehood, then, is what does not correspond. It tells it like it
is not, misrepresenting the way things are. The intent behind the
statement is irrelevant. If it lacks proper correspondence, it is
false.^[[12]](#note-11)^

#### Arguments for Correspondence

All non-correspondence views of truth imply correspondence, even as
they attempt to deny it. The claim: "Truth does not correspond with
what is" implies that this view corresponds to reality. Then the
non-correspondence view cannot express itself without using a
correspondence frame of reference.

If one's factual statements need not correspond to the facts in
order to be true, then any factually incorrect statement is
acceptable. It becomes impossible to lie. Any statement is
compatible with any given state of affairs.^[[13]](#note-12)^

In order to know something is true or false, there must be a real
difference between things and statements about the things. But
correspondence is the comparison of workds to their referents.
Hence, a correspondence view is necessary to make sense of factual
statements.

Communication depends on informative statements. But correspondence
to facts is what makes statements informative. All communication
ultimately depends on something being literally or factually true.
We cannot even use a metaphor unless we understand that there is a
literal meaning over against which the figurative sense is not
literal. So, it would follow that all communication depends in the
final analysis on a correspondence to truth.^[[14]](#note-13)^

#### Objections to Correspondence

Objections to the correspondence view of truth come from Christian
and non-Christian sources.

When Jesus said "I am...the truth" (John 14:6), it is argued that
he demonstrated that truth is personal, not propositional. This
falsifies the correspondence view of truth, in which truth is a
characteristic of propositions (or expressions) which correspond to
its referent. But a person, as well as a proposition, can
correspond to reality. As the "exact imprint" of the invisible God
(Heb. 1:3), Jesus perfectly corresponds to the Father (John 1:18).
He said to Philip, "whoever has seen me has seen the Father" (John
14:9). So, a person can correspond to another in his character and
actions. In this sense, persons can be said to be true, or express
the truth.^[[15]](#note-14)^

God is truth, yet there is nothing outside of himself to which he
corresponds. Yet according to the correspondence view, truth is
that which correctly represents reality. Since God lacks
correspondence, this argument goes, the correspondence theory
denies that God is true, as the Bible says he is (Rom. 3:4).
However, truth as correspondence does relate strongly to God. God's
words correspond to his thoughts. So God is true in the sense that
his word can be trusted. God's thoughts are identical to
themselves, a kind of perfect "correspondence." In this sense, God
is true to himself. If truth is understood as what corresponds to
another, then in this sense God is not "true." Rather, he is the
ultimate reality and so the standard for truth. Other things must
correspond to him in a limited way in order to be called true, not
he to them.^[[16]](#note-15)^

The basic fallacy in this objection that God is truth yet not
correspondent is that it equivocates in its definitions. If
correspondence relates only to something *outside* oneself, then
God cannot be truth, but the ultimate reality to which truth
corresponds. If correspondence can also be *inside oneself*, God
corresponds to himself in the most perfect way. He is perfect truth
by perfect self-identity. Consider the following fallacious
thinking:

1.  All who submit to the authority of the Pope are Roman Catholic.
2.  But the Pope cannot submit to himself.
3.  Therefore, the Pope is not Roman Catholic.

The mistake is in the second premise. Contrary to the claim, the
Pope can submit to himself. He simply has to follow the rules he
lays down for Roman Catholics. Likewise, God can and does live in
accord with his own authority. In this sense he is true to
himself.^[[17]](#note-16)^

## The Absolute Nature of Truth

The relativity of truth is commonly a premise of current thought.
Yet orthodox Christianity is predicated on the position that truth
is absolute. Thus, the defense of the possibility of absolute truth
is crucial to the defense of the historic Christian faith.
According to theories of relative truth, something may be true for
one person, but not for all people. Or, it may be true at one time,
but not at another. According to the absolutist view, what is true
for one person is true for all persons, times, and places.

As argued above, there is only one adequate view of the nature of
truth - the correspondence view. Other views, such as coherence and
pragmatism, describe tests for truth, not an explanation of the
nature of truth itself.
*Factual truth is that which corresponds to facts.* It is that
which corresponds to the actual state of affairs being
described.^[[18]](#note-17)^

### Relative Truth

The relativity of truth is a popular contemporary view. However,
truth is not determined by majority vote. Let's take a look at the
reasons people give for belief that truth is relative.

Of all, some things appear only to be true at some times and not at
others. For example, many people once believed the world to be
flat. Now we know that truth statement was wrong. It would seem
that this truth has changed with the times. Or has it? Did the
truth change, or did beliefs about what is true change? Well,
certainly the world did not change from a box to a sphere. What
changed in this regard is our belief, not our earth. It changed
from a false belief to a true one.^[[19]](#note-18)^

Within a statement's universe of discourse, every truth is an
absolute truth. Some statements really apply only to some people,
but the truth of those statements is just as absolute for all
people everywhere at all times as a statement that applies to all
people generally. "Daily injections of insulin are essential for
continued life" is true of persons with some life-threatening forms
of diabetes. This statement has an applied universe of discourse.
It isn't purporting to be a truth that applies to everyone. But if
it applies to Fred, then it is true of Fred for everyone. The
caveat that this statement is false for people with a normally
functioning pancreas does not detract from the statement's truth
within its universe of discourse - diabetics to whom it is properly
addressed.

Some statements appear to be true only for some. The statement, "I
feel warm" may be true for me but not for another person, who may
feel cold. I am the only one within the statement's universe of
discourse.^[[20]](#note-19)^

A teacher facing a class says: "The door to this room is on my
right." But it is on the left for the students. Relativists argue
that surely this truth is relative to the teacher since it is false
for the class. But on the contrary it is equally true for everyone
that the door is on the professor's right. This is an absolute
truth. It will never be true for anyone, anywhere at any time that
the door was on the professor's left during this class on this day
in this room. The truth is equally absolute that the door was on
the student's left.

It seems obvious that the temperature frequently is relatively high
in Arizona and relatively cold at the North Pole. So, apparently
some things are true for some places but not for other places.
Right?

Not so. Some things are true concerning some places, but not true
in other places where the conditions are different. But that isn't
the point. Within the Arizona weather report's universe of
discourse, the statement corresponds to the facts. So it is true
everywhere. The statement: "It is relatively cold for earth at the
North Pole" is true for people in Arizona in the summer, or on
Pluto where it is colder than on the North Pole. Truth is what
corresponds to the facts, and the fact is that it feels cold at the
North Pole.^[[21]](#note-20)^

All truth is absolute. There are no relative truths. For if
something is really true, then it is really true for everyone
everywhere, and for all time. The truth statement 7 + 3 = 10 is not
just true for mathematics majors, nor is it true only in a
mathematics classroom. It is true for everyone
everywhere.^[[22]](#note-21)^

## Evaluation

### Absolutely Relative?

Most relativists really believe relativism is true for everybody,
not just for them. But that is the one thing they cannot hold if
they are really relativists. For a relative truth is just true for
me but not necessarily for anyone else. So, the relativist who
things relativism is true for everyone is an absolutist. Such a
persona believes in at least one absolute truth.^[[23]](#note-22)^
The dilemma is this: a consistent relativist cannot say "It is an
absolute truth for everyone that truth is only relatively true."
Nor can the person say, "It is only relatively true that relativism
is true." If it is only relatively true, then relativism may be
false for some or all others. Why then should I accept it as true?
Either the claim that truth is relative is an absolute claim, which
would falsify the relativist position, or it is an assertion that
can never really be made, because every time you make it you have
to add another "relatively." This begins an
[infinite regress](index.php?title=Infinite_regress&action=edit&redlink=1 "Infinite regress (page does not exist)")
that will never pay off in a real statement.^[[24]](#note-23)^

The only way the relativist can avoid the painful dilemma of
relativism is to admit that there are at least some absolute
truths. As noted, most relativists believe that relativism is
absolutely true and that everyone should be a relativist. Therein
lies the self-destructive nature of relativism. The relativist
stands on the pinnacle of an absolute truth and wants to relativize
everything else.^[[25]](#note-24)^

### A World of Contradictions

If relativism were true, then the world would be full of
contradictory conditions. For if something is true for me but false
for you, then opposite conditions exist. For if I say "There is
milk in the refrigerator" and you say "there is not any milk in the
refrigerator" - and we both are right, then there must both be and
not be milk in the refrigerator at the same time and in the same
sense. But that is impossible. So, if truth were relative, then an
impossible would be actual.

In the religious realm it would mean that Billy Graham is telling
the truth when he says, "God exists," and Madalyn Murray O'Hare is
also right when she claims , "God does not exist." But these two
statemtents cannot both be true. If one is true, then the other is
false. And since they exhaust the only possibilities, one of them
must be true.^[[26]](#note-25)^

### No Wrongs and No Rights

If truth is relative, then no one is ever wrong - even when they
are. As long as something is true to me, then I'm right even when
I'm wrong. The drawback is that I could never learn anything
either, because learning is moving from a false belief to a true
one - that is, from an absolutely false belief to an absolutely
true one. The truth is that absolutes are inescapable.

## Answering Objections

Relativists have leveled several objections to the view of truth as
absolute. The following are the most important:

### No Absolute Knowledge

It is objected that truth cannot be absolute since we do not have
an absolute knowledge of truths. Even most absolutists admit that
most things are known only in terms of degrees of probability. How,
then, can all truth be absolute? We can be absolutely sure of some
things. I am absolutely sure that I exist. In fact, my existence is
undeniable. For I would have to exist in order to make the
statement, "I do not exist." I am also absolutely sure that I
cannot exist and not exist at the same time. And that there are no
square circles. And that 3+2=5.^[[27]](#note-26)^

We can be absolutely sure of some things. I am absolutely sure that
I exist. In fact, my existence is undeniable. For I would have to
exist in order to make the statement, "I do not exist." I am also
absolutely sure that I cannot exist and not exist at the same time.
And that there are no square circles. And that 3+2=5.

There are many more things of which I am not absolutely certain.
But even here the relativist is misguided in rejecting absolute
truth simply because we lack absolute *evidence* that some things
are true. The truth can be absolute no matter what our grounds for
believing it. For example, if is true that Sidney, Australia, is on
the Pacific Ocean, then it is absolutely true no matter what my
evidence or lack of evidence may be. An absolute truth is
absolutely true in itself, no matter what evidence there is.
Evidence, or the lack thereof, does not change a fact. And truth is
what corresponds to the facts. The truth doesn't change just
because we learn something more about it.^[[28]](#note-27)^

### In-between Truths

Another objection is that many things are comparative - like
relative sizes such as shorter and taller. As such they cannot be
absolute truths, since they change depending on the object to which
they relate. For example, some people are good compared to Hitler
but evil as compared to Mother Teresa. Contrary to the claim of
relativists, in-between things do not prove absolutism. For the
facts that "John is short in relation to an NBA player," and "John
is tall compared to a jockey" are absolutely true for all times and
all people. John is in-between in size, and it depends on which one
to whom he is compared whether he is shorter or taller.
Nonetheless, it is absolutely true that John (being five feet ten
inches) is short compared to most basketball players and tall
compared to the majority of jockeys. The same thing is true of
other in-between things, such as, warmer or colder, and better or
worse.^[[29]](#note-28)^

### No New Truth (or Progress)

If truth never changes, then there can't be any new truth. This
would mean that no progress is possible. But we do come to know new
truths. That is what scientific discovery is all about. In response
to this, "new truth" can be understood in two ways. It might mean
"new to us," like a new discovery in science. But that is only a
matter of discovering an "old" truth. After all, the law of gravity
was there long before Isaac Newton.^[[30]](#note-29)^ Many truths
have always been there, but we are just finding out about them. The
other way we might understand "new truth" is that something new has
come into existence that makes it possible to make a new statement
about it that is only then true for the first time. That's no
problem either. When January 1, 2020, arrives, a new truth will be
born. Until that day it will not be true to say, "This is January
1, 2020." But when that happens it will be true for all people and
places forever more. So "old" truths don't change and neither do
"new" truths when they come to pass. Once it is true, it is always
true - for everyone.

### Truth and Growth in Knowledge

It is also objected that knowledge of truth is not absolute, since
we grow in truth. What is true today may be false tomorrow. The
progress of science is proof that truth is constantly
changing.^[[31]](#note-30)^ This objection fails to note that it is
not the truth that is changing but our understanding of it. When
science truly progresses, it does not move from an old truth to a
new truth, but from error to truth. When Copernicus argued that the
earth moves around the sun and not the reverse, truth did not
change. What changed was the scientific understanding about what
moves around what.^[[32]](#note-31)^

### Narrow Absolutes

Of course truth is narrow. There is only one answer for what is
4+4. It is not 1. It is not 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10 or any other
number. It is 8 and only 8. That's narrow, but it is correct.

Non-Christians often claim that Christians are narrow-minded,
because they claim that Christianity is true and all non-Christian
systems are false. However, the same is true of non-Christians who
claim that what they view a truth is true, and all opposing beliefs
are false. that is equally narrow. The fact of the matter is that
if C (Christianity) is true, then it follows that all non-C is
false. Likewise, if H (say, Humanism) is true, then all non-H is
false. Both views are equally narrow. That's the way truth is. Each
truth claim excludes contradictory truth claims. Christianity is no
more narrow than is any other set of beliefs, whether
[atheism](Atheism "Atheism"),
[agnosticism](Agnosticism "Agnosticism"),
[skepticism](index.php?title=Skepticism&action=edit&redlink=1 "Skepticism (page does not exist)"),
or [pantheism](Pantheism "Pantheism").^[[33]](#note-32)^

### Dogmatic Absolutes

The claim that those who believe in absolute truth are dogmatic
misses the point. If all truth is absolute - true for all people,
times, and places - everyone who claims anything is true is
"dogmatic." Even the relativist who claims relativism is true is
dogmatic. For the person who claims that relativism is absolutely
true is particularly dogmatic. This person claims to won the only
absolute truth that can be uttered, namely, that everything else is
relative.^[[34]](#note-33)^

Something important is overlooked in this charge of dogmatism.
There is a big difference between the pejorative charge that belief
in absolute truth is dogmatic and the manner in which someone may
hold to this belief. No doubt the manner with which many
absolutists have held to and conveyed their beliefs has been less
than humble. However, no agnostic would consider it a telling
argument against agnosticism that some agnostics communicate their
beliefs in a dogmatic manner.^[[35]](#note-34)^

Nonetheless, there is an important distinction to keep in mind:
Truth is absolute, but our grasp of it is not. Just because there
is absolute truth does not mean that our understanding of it is
absolute. This fact in itself should cause the absolutists to
temper convictions with humility. For while truth is absolute, our
understanding of absolute truth is not absolute. As finite
creatures, we grow in our understanding of truth.

## Summary

Truth may be tested in many ways but it should be understood in
only one way. There is one reality, to which statements or ideas
must conform in order to be regarded as true. There may be many
different ways to defend different truth claims, but there is
really only one proper way to define truth, namely, as
correspondence. The confusion between the nature of truth and the
verification of truth is at the heart of the rejection of a
correspondence view of truth.

Likewise, there *is* a difference between what truth is and what
truth *does*. Truth is *correspondence*, but truth has certain
*consequences*. Truth itself should not be confused with its
results or with its application. The failure to make this
distinction leads to wrong views of the nature of truth. Truth is
that which corresponds to reality or to the state of affairs it
purports to describe. And falsehood is what does not correspond.

## Footnotes

1.  [â](#ref-0) Aristotle, *Posterior Analytics*, (Cambridge, Mass:
    Harvard University Press, 1960).
2.  [â](#ref-1) Thomas Aquinas, *On Truth*, (Chicago: H. Regnery,
    1952-54).
3.  [â](#ref-2) Paul Copan, *True for You, but Not for Me*,
    (Minneapolis, Minn: Bethany House Publishers, 1998).
4.  [â](#ref-3) William James,
    *Pragmatism: A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking*, (Hackett
    Publishing, 1981).
5.  [â](#ref-4) David F. Wells,
    *God in the Wasteland: The Reality of Truth in a World of Fading Dreams*,
    (Grand Rapids, Mich: W.B. Eerdmans, 1994).
6.  [â](#ref-5) James F. Harris,
    *Against Relativism: A Philosophical Defense of Method*, (La Salle,
    Ill: Open Court, 1992).
7.  [â](#ref-6) SÃ¸ren Kierkegaard,
    *For Self-Examination: And, Judge for Yourselves! And Three Discourses, 1851*,
    (London: Oxford University Press, 1941).
8.  [â](#ref-7) Martin Buber,
    *Eclipse of God: Studies in the Relation Between Religion and Philosophy*,
    (New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1957).
9.  [â](#ref-8) C. S. Lewis,
    *The Abolition of Man, or, Reflections on Education with Special Reference to the Teaching of English in the Upper Forms of Schools*,
    (San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco, 2001).
10. [â](#ref-9) Copan*, True for You, but Not for Me*.
11. [â](#ref-10) Harris,
    *Against Relativism: A Philosophical Defense of Method*.
12. [â](#ref-11) Aquinas, *On Truth*.
13. [â](#ref-12) Norman L. Geisler,
    *Thomas Aquinas: An Evangelical Appraisal*, (Grand Rapids, Mich:
    Baker Book House, 1991).
14. [â](#ref-13) Norman L. Geisler and Winfried Corduan,
    *Philosophy of Religion*, (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1988).
15. [â](#ref-14) Anselm,
    *Truth, Freedom, and Evil; Three Philosophical Dialogues*, (New
    York: Harper & Row, 1967).
16. [â](#ref-15) Norman L. Geisler and Winfried Corduan,
    *Philosophy of Religion*.
17. [â](#ref-16) Ibid.
18. [â](#ref-17) James F. Harris, *Against Relativism*.
19. [â](#ref-18) Ibid.
20. [â](#ref-19) Copan, *True for You, but Not for Me*.
21. [â](#ref-20) Ibid.
22. [â](#ref-21) James F. Harris, *Against Relativism*.
23. [â](#ref-22) Ibid.
24. [â](#ref-23) Norman L. Geisler and Winfried Corduan,
    *Philosophy of Religion*.
25. [â](#ref-24) Ibid.
26. [â](#ref-25) Ibid.
27. [â](#ref-26) Anselm,
    *Truth, Freedom, and Evil; Three Philosophical Dialogues*, (New
    York: Harper & Row, 1967).
28. [â](#ref-27) Ibid.
29. [â](#ref-28) Allan David Bloom,
    *The Closing of the American Mind: How Higher Education Has Failed Democracy and Impoverished the Souls of Today's Students*,
    (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1987).
30. [â](#ref-29) Norman L. Geisler and Winfried Corduan,
    *Philosophy of Religion*.
31. [â](#ref-30) Augustine, *Against the Academics*, (Westminster,
    Md: Newman Press, 1951).
32. [â](#ref-31) Allan David Bloom,
    *The Closing of the American Mind: How Higher Education Has Failed Democracy and Impoverished the Souls of Today's Students*.
33. [â](#ref-32) Norman L. Geisler and Winfried Corduan,
    *Philosophy of Religion*.
34. [â](#ref-33) Plato, *Protagoras*, (Boston: Ginn & Company,
    1889).
35. [â](#ref-34) Francis Macdonald Cornford,
    *Plato's Theory of Knowledge: The Theaetetus and the Sophist of Plato*,
    (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1951).

## See also

-   [Relativism](Relativism "Relativism")
-   [Postmodernism](Postmodernism "Postmodernism")

## External links

-   [Truth, Contemporary Philosophy, and the Postmodern Turn](http://www.str.org/site/News2?page=NewsArticle&id=5682)
    by [J.P. Moreland](J.P._Moreland "J.P. Moreland")
-   [What Is Truth and Why Does It Matter?](http://www.boundless.org/features/a0000911.html),
    by J.P. Moreland
-   [Aletheia and the Correspondence Theory of Truth](http://erdman31.googlepages.com/Correspondence-aletheia.pdf)
    (PDF) A lengthy paper by Jonathan Erdman examining *aletheia* in
    the Gospel of John and examining the implications for the
    Correspondence Theory of Truth
-   [A few, brief words on a theology of truth](http://theosproject.blogspot.com/2006/07/few-brief-words-on-theology-of-truth.html)
    (PDF) by Jonathan Erdman
-   [Truth](http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/15073a.htm) (New
    Advent)



